pages: 6

--- PAGE 1 ---
A Two-Stage LLM-Enhanced DDoS Detection
Framework for Next-Generation IoT and Edge
Networks
Ali Alfatemi
Fordham Univ.
NY , USA
aalfatemi@fordham.edu
Mohamed Rahouti
Fordham Univ.
NY , USA
mrahouti@fordham.edu
Zakirul Alam Bhuiyan
Fordham Univ.
NY , USA
mbhuiyan3@fordham.edu
Abdellah Chehri
Royal Military College
ON, Canada
chehri@rmc.ca
Aiman Solyman
Univ. of Milano
Milan, Italy
aiman.solyman@unimi.it
Abstract—The rapid expansion of IoT and edge networks has
increased vulnerability to security threats, notably Distributed
Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks, which target the application
layer and can overwhelm networks. This paper introduces a
novel two-stage DDoS detection pipeline for IoT and edge
networks that utilizes large language model (LLM) embeddings
for textual protocol fields along with numeric features like TCP
handshake metrics. The first stage accurately identifies traffic as
Normal or DDoS, while the second stage classifies confirmed
DDoS flows into specific types (UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP),
correcting any initial false positives. Comprehensive testing on
a specialized IoT dataset demonstrated perfect detection rates
of 100% in the first stage and 99.91% in subclass classification,
highlighting the effectiveness of combining LLM-based textual
data with traditional numeric indicators for advanced intrusion
detection.
Index Terms —DDoS detection, IoT security, LLM, textual
embeddings, edge computing, machine learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
The exponential proliferation of Internet of Things (IoT)
and Industrial IoT (IIoT) devices has significantly reshaped
contemporary network infrastructures [1], enabling transfor-
mative applications in healthcare, manufacturing, transporta-
tion, and various smart-city contexts. However, this rapid con-
nectivity also exposes critical vulnerabilities [2], [3]. Among
the most disruptive and pervasive threats are DDoS attacks,
which can flood targets with overwhelming traffic and degrade
or incapacitate entire networks [4]–[6]. Traditional solutions
for DDoS detection have often hinged on packet-level or flow-
level numeric metrics, such as TCP flags, payload sizes, or
flow timeouts [7]. Still, these approaches frequently struggle
to adapt to emerging, more subtle DDoS vectors that may
exhibit obfuscation or dynamically shifting signatures [8].
In parallel, large language models (LLMs) have advanced
to the point of capturing nuanced semantic patterns not only
in natural language text but also in semi-structured protocol
fields (e.g., HTTP request lines and MQTT topics) [9], [10].
Such textual content can reveal malicious behaviors at the
application layer that numeric features alone might miss [11]–
[13]. Drawing on this insight, the present study proposes a
two-stage DDoS detection pipeline for next-generation IoT
and edge networks. The first stage performs a coarse separa-
tion between benign (Normal) and malicious (DDoS) traffic.
In the second stage, any flows flagged as DDoS are sub-
classified into one of four principal DDoS variants (UDP,
ICMP, TCP, HTTP) or restored to Normal if the initial
decision was a false positive.
By systematically embedding textual protocol fields (e.g.,
http.request.method, mqtt.topic) via the all-
MiniLM-L6-v2 transformer model, the pipeline fuses se-
mantic signals with conventional numeric features (e.g.,
TCP handshake counts). Through comprehensive experimen-
tation on a curated five-class subset of the ML-EdgeIIoT-
dataset [14], we demonstrate that numeric-plus-textual data
reliably identifies not only the presence of DDoS but also
the specific subclass of the attack. Our results show that
Stage 1 can reach a perfect 100% separation of Normal
vs. DDoS, while Stage 2 yields near-perfect performance in
distinguishing sub-classes or correcting Stage 1 errors. The
key contributions of this work are summarized as follows,
highlighting the novel methodologies and significant findings
introduced in this study:
• Introduce a two-stage detection framework that first
separates normal traffic from DDoS attacks and then
classifies malicious traffic into one of five categories
(Normal, UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP) to improve detection
accuracy and mitigate false positives.
• Leverage embeddings from the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 trans-
former model to capture nuanced patterns in textual
protocol fields (e.g., HTTP methods, MQTT topics),
combining these with traditional numeric features for
enhanced DDoS detection.
• Achieve a 100% detection rate in the initial classification
stage and 99.91% accuracy in the subclass classification
stage using a curated IoT/edge dataset, showcasing the
effectiveness of combining numeric and textual features.
• Demonstrate a flexible pipeline structure that can adapt
to different IoT and edge network contexts, enabling
both accurate attack detection and targeted mitigation
strategies for evolving DDoS threats.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. Section II
reviews related DDoS detection research and LLM-based
embeddings for protocol analysis. Section III outlines the
2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication & Information Systems Security
7
GLOBECOM 2025 - 2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference | 979-8-3315-7781-0/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/GLOBECOM59602.2025.11431718
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on April 21,2026 at 16:20:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
proposed detection pipeline, including data handling and
multi-stage classification techniques. Section IV details the
experimental procedures and metrics. Section V presents and
analyzes the results. Section VI discusses the implications,
limitations, and future research directions. The paper con-
cludes in Section VII.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The security of IoT and IIoT ecosystems has prompted a
surge of research focused on defending against DDoS attacks
[15]. Early detection systems typically relied on threshold-
based rules or purely statistical analyses, which had lim-
ited adaptability when confronted with evolving malicious
patterns [5], [16]. Later, machine learning (ML) approaches
harnessed numeric features—such as flow rates, TCP flag
distributions, and inter-packet timings—to isolate suspicious
traffic with moderate success [4], [17]. Yet, these numeric-
only techniques sometimes fail to capture application-layer
abuses embedded in textual fields, such as anomalous HTTP
methods or manipulated MQTT parameters.
Recent progress in large language modeling has shown the
value of embeddings in capturing subtle textual indicators
of malicious behavior [11], [18]. Protocol fields written as
ASCII text (like GET, POST, SUBSCRIBE, or custom URIs)
can harbor clues that numeric features miss. For instance,
covert DDoS attacks might keep packet rates moderate but
systematically craft suspicious method calls [19]. The synergy
between numeric and textual embeddings has thus emerged as
a powerful strategy for intrusion detection.
Two-stage classification pipelines have been proposed in
scenarios beyond DDoS—such as general intrusion detec-
tion—yet the typical approach merges all DDoS traffic into a
single malicious label [14]. Differentiating among sub-classes
(UDP floods, ICMP floods, TCP-SYN floods, or HTTP-
based layer-7 attacks) proves invaluable for designing targeted
mitigation policies. Another nuance arises from the possibility
of false positives in the initial detection stage: robust pipelines
can rectify mistakes if the second stage includes a Normal
output among its sub-class labels.
Against this backdrop, our work capitalizes on textual
embeddings from the all-MiniLM-L6-v2 transformer to in-
corporate protocol-level semantics integrated with numeric
domain features (e.g., TCP len, content length, handshake
counts). We demonstrate that a carefully constructed two-stage
pipeline can effectively isolate normal traffic, sort out DDoS
sub-classes, and correct Stage 1 misclassifications if necessary.
In parallel to our approach, simpler intrusion detection
pipelines exist based solely on flow statistics and machine
learning. For example, [20] demonstrates how an SDN-based
IDS, leveraging only numeric features, can achieve strong
performance for botnet detection. However, such purely statis-
tical or binary classifiers typically merge all malicious traffic
into a single category (malicious vs. normal). In contrast, our
two-stage framework provides fine-grained sub-classification
of DDoS (e.g., UDP, TCP, HTTP-based layer-7) and leverages
Fig. 1. High-level depiction of the two-stage pipeline. Data are filtered into
five classes (Normal, DDoS UDP, DDoS ICMP, DDoS TCP, DDoS HTTP).
Numeric and textual columns are extracted and processed, then fed to Stage 1
(Normal vs. DDoS). Flows predicted as malicious proceed to Stage 2,
classifying them to one of five final labels (Normal, UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP).
textual embeddings to capture sophisticated application-layer
threats.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
The pipeline of the proposed framework consists of two
classification stages that operate on numeric flow metrics
and textual embeddings extracted from protocol-level columns
(e.g., HTTP or MQTT). Each stage employs XGBoost gradi-
ent boosting for robust classification, with distinct training
sets and objectives. Figure 1 provides a schematic overview,
showing the main data flows and transformations.
The detailed algorithm for the proposed pipeline is outlined
in Algorithm 1, which systematically integrates numeric and
textual features for DDoS detection. Stage 1 focuses on
binary classification to separate normal traffic from potential
DDoS flows, leveraging both domain-specific numeric metrics
and high-dimensional textual embeddings. Flows identified as
malicious in Stage 1 proceed to Stage 2, where a refined multi-
class classification is performed to assign specific DDoS sub-
class labels or correct false positives. This two-stage approach
ensures accurate detection while minimizing misclassifica-
tion, making it adaptable to heterogeneous IoT and edge
network environments. This structured methodology forms
the backbone of the pipeline, ensuring robust and scalable
DDoS detection. Details about the key pipeline components
are discussed next.
A. Data Filtering and Preprocessing
Our experiments focus on a filtered subset of the ML-
EdgeIIoT-dataset [14], retaining Normal plus four major
DDoS variants (UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP). For clarity, we ex-
clude other classes (e.g., scanning and ransomware). Given the
dataset’s imbalance, we limit Normal to 20,000 samples and
each DDoS sub-class to 15,000. After removing duplicates
and incomplete rows, the final shape is typically around 70k
records. These data are split into an 80% training set and 20%
test set, ensuring stratification of all five classes.
B. Balancing and Dimensionality Reduction
The initial downsampling partially offsets class imbalance
within the training data but still often persists. SMOTE [21]
is applied to oversample the minority class in each training
fold of Stage 1 (Normal vs. DDoS). Similarly, if specific
DDoS sub-classes remain under-represented for the sub-class
2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication & Information Systems Security
8
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on April 21,2026 at 16:20:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
training in Stage 2, SMOTE can also balance them. We then
employ simple dimensionality pruning, including a variance
threshold (removing features with negligible variance) and
SelectKBest (e.g., K = 200) based on ANOV A F-values,
to reduce computational overhead and the risk of overfitting.
Algorithm 1 Two-Stage LLM-enhanced DDoS detection pro-
cedure.
1: Input:
• Network traffic dataset D = {(x1, y1), . . . , (xN , yN )} containing both
numeric and textual features.
• Each sample xi has:
– Numeric features ni (e.g., packet sizes, TCP handshake metrics).
– Textual features ti (e.g., HTTP methods, MQTT topics).
• Ground-truth label yi, where
• yi ∈ {Normal, DDoS-UDP, DDoS-ICMP, DDoS-TCP, DDoS-HTTP}.
2: Output:
• Two trained classifiers M1 (Stage 1: Normal vs. DDoS) and M2 (Stage 2:
sub-classification).
• Pipeline that, given new samples, predicts the final label (Normal or one of
the DDoS sub-classes).
3: procedure TRAIN PIPELINE
Step A: Preprocessing and Feature Extraction
4: for each sample xi ∈ D do
5: Extract numeric features ni ▷ e.g., flow duration, TCP flags, content
length
6: Embed textual features ti ▷ Use a sentence-transformer like
all-MiniLM-L6-v2
7: Let ei = Embed(ti) ▷ e i is a 384-dim embedding, if only one text
column
8: zi = Concat(ni, ei) ▷ Merge numeric + embedded textual features
9: end for
Step B: Data Splits and Balancing
10: Split D into training set Dtrain (80%) and test set Dtest (20%), stratified by
class
11: Optionally apply SMOTE/oversampling to Dtrain ▷ Balance Normal and
DDoS classes
Step C: Stage 1 Classifier (Binary: Normal vs. DDoS)
12: Relabel yi as Normal=0 or DDoS=1
13: Train XGBoost model M1 on Dtrain ▷ Tuning hyperparams via grid search
14: Evaluate M1 on Dtest ▷ Check accuracy, confusion matrix (Normal vs. DDoS)
Step D: Stage 2 Classifier (Multi-Class: Normal, UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP)
15: Filter Dtrain to get only DDoS samples (plus a small portion of Normal) ▷
We want M2 to distinguish among DDoS sub-classes, but also allow “Normal” if
Stage 1 was a false positive.
16: Train a second XGBoost model M2 (multi-class) using the sub-class labels:
Normal, DDoS-UDP, DDoS-ICMP, DDoS-TCP, DDoS-HTTP
17: Evaluate M2 on Dtest (only DDoS samples plus some Normal) ▷ Check
multi-class confusion matrix, e.g. 5x5
18: Return {M1, M2} ▷ Trained Stage 1 and Stage 2 models
19: end procedure
20: procedure INFERENCE ((classifying new traffic sample) )
21: Input: New sample ˜x with numeric features ˜n, textual features ˜t
22: Extract numeric features ˜n
23: ˜e = Embed(˜t) ▷ Obtain text embedding via the same model as training
24: ˜z = Concat(˜n, ˜e)
Stage 1 Prediction
25: ˆy1 = M1(˜z) ▷ Binary: Normal or DDoS
26: if ˆy1 = Normal then
27: return Normal ▷ Stop here; sample is presumed benign
28: else
Stage 2 Prediction
29: ˆy2 = M2(˜z) ▷ Possible outputs: Normal, UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP
30: return ˆy2 ▷ Sub-class label or Normal if Stage 1 was false alarm
31: end if
32: end procedure
C. Stage 1: Binary Normal vs. DDoS Classification
All training samples—Normal and four DDoS variants—are
grouped into two labels: Normal (0) and DDoS (1). XG-
Boost is then fit with a grid-search process spanning dif-
ferent n_estimators (50, 100), max_depth (6, 10),
learning_rate (0.1, 0.01), subsample (1.0, 0.8), and
colsample_bytree (1.0, 0.8). The best parameter set is
refit on the entire training portion, yielding a final Stage-1
model. During inference, if a flow is predicted as Normal, the
pipeline concludes immediately; if predicted as DDoS, the
flow proceeds to Stage 2.
D. Stage 2: Five-Class Classification (Correct or Sub-
Classify)
Stage 2 focuses on sub-classifying any flow that Stage 1
declares malicious. To ensure that the system can recover from
Stage 1 false positives, Stage 2’s set of possible labels includes
Normal plus the four subclasses of DDoS (UDP, ICMP, TCP,
HTTP). We reapply the same numeric plus textual embeddings
approach, scaled and dimension-reduced, but train only on
the DDoS flows augmented with a smaller portion of Normal
data to enable reclassification. Another search of the XGBoost
grid identifies an optimal set of boosting hyperparameters.
After training, the final Stage 2 model can properly label truly
malicious flows while restoring any wrongly flagged normal
traffic.
E. Feature Extraction and LLM-Based Embedding
Numeric columns include time-based statistics (flow dura-
tions, intervals), packet sizes, TCP handshake variables (SYN
vs. ACK counts), content lengths, etc. Missing numeric values
are filled with zero or means to prevent irregularities.
Separately, textual columns (e.g., http.request.method,
mqtt.topic, tcp.srcport) are encoded via the “sentence-
transformers” library with the all − M iniLM − L6 − v2
model, producing a 384-dimensional embedding per column.
Embeddings from multiple text columns are concatenated
horizontally. The 384-dimensional vector size arises from the
internal architecture of the all − M iniLM − L6 − v2 model,
which was pretrained with a 384-dimensional hidden layer.
This dimension is therefore not user-defined, but rather an
inherent characteristic of the specific transformer design. Fi-
nally, the numeric features and the textual embedding vectors
are combined into a single representation. A standard scaler
normalizes each dimension.
F . Implementation and Evaluation
Both stages use Python 3.9 with scikit − learn, xgboost,
and sentence − transf ormers, running on a Linux server
environment. We evaluate accuracy, precision, recall, F1, and
confusion matrices for each stage on a 20% held-out test
set. The pipeline’s overall performance is then gauged by
chaining Stage 1’s outputs into Stage 2’s multi-class logic.
This arrangement highlights the synergy between the features
of the numeric domain and the LLM embeddings in the
detection and categorization of DDoS within next-generation
IoT networks.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
This section outlines the configurations and procedures for
training and testing the proposed pipeline. Table I summarizes
the key steps and parameter choices.
Dataset partitioning. After restricting the data to five
classes and capping each class size, we randomly split into an
2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication & Information Systems Security
9
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on April 21,2026 at 16:20:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP : MAIN STEPS AND PARAMETER RANGES .
Step Specification
Data Source ML-EdgeIIoT-dataset; 5 classes retained (Nor-
mal + 4 DDoS: UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP).
Downsampling Max 20k Normal, 15k per DDoS sub-class;
remove duplicates, handle missing.
Train/Test Split 80% training, 20% testing, stratified by class.
Textual Embeddings all-MiniLM-L6-v2 via sentence-transformers
(384 dims per column).
Numeric Features Flow-level metrics (content length, TCP len,
syn/ack flags, etc.).
Balancing SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Oversampling)
on training folds if needed.
Feature Selection VarianceThreshold (0.005), SelectKBest (top
200 by ANOV A F-value).
Stage 1 Model XGBoost grid: n estimators {50,100},
max depth {6,10}, learning rate {0.1, 0.01},
subsample {1.0,0.8}, colsample bytree
{1.0,0.8}. Binary classification.
Stage 2 Model XGBoost with same grid. Multi-class classifi-
cation (Normal, UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP).
Metrics Accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, confu-
sion matrix for each stage.
80% training portion and 20% test portion while preserving
class ratios. The training set is used for model fitting and
cross-validation with grid searches, while the test set remains
strictly unseen for final metrics.
Textual column embedding. Columns such as
http.request.method, mqtt.topic, tcp.srcport, or other short
strings are embedded via SentenceT ransf ormer(“all −
M iniLM − L6 − v2”), generating one 384-dimensional
vector per textual column. If multiple columns exist, vectors
are concatenated horizontally.
Balancing and scaling. To mitigate skewed distributions,
SMOTE is applied at Stage 1 training. For Stage 2, we re-
balance only among the relevant DDoS classes plus a fraction
of Normal traffic so that sub-classes remain relatively even. A
standard scaler is fit on the training data and applied to both
training and test sets.
Classification and hyperparameter search. Both stages
employ XGBClassifier from xgboost. An exhaustive
grid search over a small set of hyperparameters (tree depth,
learning rate, number of trees, subsampling) is performed with
three-fold cross-validation. The best combination is refit on
the entire training partition.
Evaluation. For Stage 1, we measure the confusion matrix
between Normal and DDoS, along with standard binary met-
rics (accuracy, recall, precision, F1). For Stage 2, we measure
multi-class confusion among five possible outputs (Normal,
UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP), analyzing the model’s success both
in discriminating sub-classes and in correcting any Stage 1
mislabeling of benign traffic.
V. R ESULTS
We now present the pipeline’s detection and classification
performance. In brief, the results show that Stage 1 can ideally
separate Normal from DDoS. At the same time, Stage 2
TABLE II
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR STAGE 1 (N ORMAL VS . DD OS) ON THE TEST
PARTITION . THE PIPELINE ACHIEVES PERFECT ACCURACY FOR THIS
DATASET.
Predicted Normal Predicted DDoS
True Normal 3978 0
True DDoS 0 9680
achieves near-perfect accuracy in fine-grained labeling of
malicious flows or restoring Normal if Stage 1 flagged them
incorrectly.
A. Stage 1 Results: Normal vs. DDoS
Table II and Figure 2 summarize Stage 1’s binary clas-
sification. On a 20% test set, the pipeline achieved 100%
accuracy: 3978 Normal samples were identified as Normal,
and 9680 DDoS samples were flagged as DDoS. Furthermore,
Figure 2 depicts the binary confusion matrix for Stage 1,
which separates Normal from DDoS traffic. The perfect split
here highlights the effectiveness of our combined numeric
and LLM-based textual features on this curated dataset,
where malicious vs. benign samples exhibit clear distinctions.
These results set the stage for the second classification phase
(Stage 2), where flows identified as DDoS are further sub-
classified or—if Stage 1 erred—restored to Normal.
Fig. 2. Stage-1 confusion matrix (Normal vs. DDoS) illustrating a perfect
split between benign and malicious flows.
Although 100% performance is exceptionally high, it aligns
with prior observations that specific IoT/IIoT datasets contain
easily distinguishable numeric and textual patterns. Embed-
ding textual protocol fields likely contributed to the pipeline’s
ability to detect subtle anomalies among DDoS flows.
B. Stage 2 Results: Five-Class Classification (Normal, UDP ,
ICMP , TCP , HTTP)
For the second stage, we incorporate all malicious flows
plus an allowance for Normal so that the final sub-
classes number five: Normal, DDoS_UDP, DDoS_ICMP,
2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication & Information Systems Security
10
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on April 21,2026 at 16:20:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
DDoS_TCP, and DDoS_HTTP. Table III lists the confusion
matrix on the test set restricted to DDoS-labeled flows, with
the possibility of outputting Normal if Stage 1 had misjudged.
Table III shows the confusion matrix for Stage 2’s five-class
classification (Normal, UDP, ICMP, TCP, and HTTP). Each
row corresponds to the true class of malicious samples flagged
by Stage 1, while the columns represent predicted labels.
Notably, the “Normal” column allows Stage 2 to correct false
positives if Stage 1 was overly strict. The sparse off-diagonal
entries indicate that each DDoS variant shares few confusing
characteristics with the others, reflecting how numeric flow
metrics plus embedded textual protocol fields (e.g., HTTP
methods) help the model accurately differentiate among UDP,
ICMP, TCP, and HTTP-based DDoS subtypes.
TABLE III
CONFUSION MATRIX FOR STAGE 2’S FIVE -CLASS OUTPUT . T RUE LABELS
ARE FROM MALICIOUS FLOWS ONLY , BUT THE PREDICTED LABEL CAN
ALSO BE NORMAL TO CORRECT FALSE POSITIVES FROM STAGE 1.
Predicted
True Normal UDP ICMP TCP HTTP
UDP 0 2895 5 0 0
ICMP 0 4 2814 0 0
TCP 0 0 0 2050 0
HTTP 0 0 0 0 2112
In practice, no test sample in the malicious portion is
predicted as Normal. This indicates that Stage 1 introduced
no false positives in this dataset. Among the actual DDoS
sub-classes, the overall accuracy of Stage 2 is 99.91%. For
instance, UDP had 2900 test samples, only five misclassified as
ICMP, and the TCP/HTTP classes are recognized with 100%
fidelity. Figure 3 and Table IV show these performance metrics
in more detail.
Fig. 3. Confusion matrix for Stage 2 multi-class labeling. Each row sums to
the total for that DDoS sub-class. Misclassifications mainly occur between
UDP and ICMP, with five or fewer errors per class.
End-to-End Pipeline. Chaining Stage 1 and Stage 2 yields a
final five-class decision for each flow. Because Stage 1 in this
experiment did not misclassify any normal traffic, Stage 2
TABLE IV
STAGE-2 CLASSIFICATION METRICS (PRECISION , RECALL , F1) ACROSS
THE FIVE CLASSES : NORMAL , UDP, ICMP, TCP, HTTP. T HE PIPELINE
OBTAINS NEAR -PERFECT PERFORMANCE .
Label Precision Recall F1-score Support
Normal 1.0000 — — 0 (no actual normal in test subset)
UDP 0.9986 0.9983 0.9984 2900
ICMP 0.9982 0.9986 0.9984 2818
TCP 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 2050
HTTP 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 2112
Overall Accuracy 0.9991
never needed to re-label a false positive back to Normal.
Hence, the pipeline demonstrates a perfect normal detection
rate in Stage 1 and a near-perfect sub-classification in Stage 2.
C. Discussion of Overall Performance
Although 100% accuracy in Stage 1 might appear ex-
traordinary for real-world applications, such performance is
not inconceivable for certain curated IoT datasets where
numeric and textual differences between Normal and DDoS
are stark. The synergy between numeric domain fea-
tures (like tcp.connection.syn, tcp.flags.ack,
syn_ack_ratio) and textual embeddings (like suspicious
HTTP methods) plays a critical role in achieving this separa-
tion. Once samples are flagged as malicious, the second stage
attains high fidelity in labeling each DDoS sub-class, exem-
plifying the potential of LLM-based embeddings in IoT/edge
network security.
VI. D ISCUSSION
The presented results highlight the advantages of introduc-
ing textual embeddings from a large language model into
the conventional numeric feature space for DDoS detection.
This discussion addresses the significance of these findings,
potential limitations, and possible avenues for future research.
Significance of LLM embeddings. Unlike purely numeric
approaches, which rely on counts, rates, and statistical anoma-
lies in packet flows, the approach captures textual protocol
data here. In IoT/IIoT settings, a wide range of application
protocols (HTTP, MQTT, AMQP, CoAP) often include se-
mantic strings that attackers can abuse. By converting these
strings to dense embeddings, the model acquires the capacity
to detect unusual usage or command sequences that do not
necessarily manifest as straightforward numeric outliers.
Pipeline structure and transferability. The two-stage
pipeline is flexible, allowing Stage 1 to filter out normal
traffic while Stage 2 focuses on sub-classifying or correcting
misclassified flows. This structure extends naturally to new
IoT or 5G/6G network contexts and can incorporate additional
sub-classes if the dataset is expanded. The entire proce-
dure—embedding, balancing, scaling, dimension reduction,
and boosted decision trees—can be ported to other intrusion
detection scenarios with minimal changes.
Dataset limitations and perfect accuracy concerns.
While the pipeline’s 100% separation of normal from ma-
licious flows is consistent with the curated dataset used,
2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication & Information Systems Security
11
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on April 21,2026 at 16:20:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
real operational environments might exhibit more overlap
between benign and suspicious usage. Additional re-training,
online adaptation, or a deeper textual embedding model might
be required to handle novel attack patterns or polymorphic
behaviors. Furthermore, embedding overhead may become a
bottleneck in high-throughput or real-time detection unless
partial embeddings or caching methods are implemented.
We acknowledge that our observed 100% detection rate for
Stage 1 arises in part from the relatively clean separation
between benign and malicious samples in the chosen, cu-
rated dataset. In a large-scale, real-world environment, subtle
overlaps or “gray” behaviors are more likely, potentially
reducing the practical accuracy. Moreover, simpler statistical
approaches (e.g., [20]) can also yield high detection rates
but often lack application-layer insight or the ability to sub-
classify different DDoS variants.
Our intent here is to highlight how numeric and textual em-
beddings can complement one another for multi-class DDoS
detection, rather than to claim a universally perfect solution
for all deployment scenarios. Possible future efforts include
fine-tuning the LLM specifically for IoT protocol patterns,
exploring zero-day detection where certain textual patterns are
unseen at training, or coupling the pipeline with automated
response actions. Another research thread might pursue in-
terpretability, explaining which numeric or embedded textual
features contributed most to each classification.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a two-stage DDoS detection pipeline for
IoT/IIoT networks, blending numeric flow metrics with textual
embeddings from an LLM. Tested on the ML-EdgeIIoT
dataset, it achieved 100% accuracy in identifying normal
versus malicious traffic and 99.91% in detecting malicious
subclasses. The approach incorporates textual data, enhancing
detection capabilities at the application layer and allowing cor-
rection of false positives while precisely classifying malicious
flows. Future efforts will aim to improve scalability, inter-
pretability, domain-specific tuning, and real-time adaptation
to evolving threats.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Edquist et al., “The internet of things and economic growth in a panel
of countries,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, vol. 30,
no. 3, pp. 262–283, 2021.
[2] W. H. Hassan et al., “Current research on internet of things (iot)
security: A survey,” Computer networks, vol. 148, pp. 283–294, 2019.
[3] A. C. Naik et al., “Enhancing IoT security: A comprehensive explo-
ration of privacy, security measures, and advanced routing solutions,”
Computer Networks, p. 111045, 2025.
[4] A. Alfatemi et al., “Identifying distributed denial of service attacks
through multi-model deep learning fusion and combinatorial analysis,”
Journal of Network and Systems Management, vol. 33, no. 1, p. 8, 2025.
[5] A. Alfatemi et al., “Precision DDoS detection through gaussian noise-
augmented neural networks,” in 2024 15th International Conference on
Network of the Future (NoF), pp. 178–185, IEEE, 2024.
[6] A. Alfatemi, M. Rahouti, R. Amin, S. ALJamal, K. Xiong, and Y . Xin,
“Advancing DDoS attack detection: A synergistic approach using deep
residual neural networks and synthetic oversampling,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.03116, 2024.
[7] M. Wichtlhuber et al., “IXP scrubber: learning from blackholing traffic
for ml-driven ddos detection at scale,” in Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2022 Conference, pp. 707–722, 2022.
[8] M. Y . M. Haq et al., “Victimization in DDoS attacks: The role of
popularity and industry sector,” Computers & Security, 2024.
[9] V . ˇSafran et al., “Multilingual framework for risk assessment and
symptom tracking (mrast),” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 4, p. 1101, 2024.
[10] Y . Li et al., “Ids-agent: An LLM agent for explainable intrusion
detection in IoT networks,” in NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Open-World
Agents, 2024.
[11] J. Zhang et al., “When llms meet cybersecurity: A systematic literature
review,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03644, 2024.
[12] L. Wang et al., “Improving text embeddings with large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00368, 2023.
[13] O. Polat et al., “Multi-stage learning framework using convolutional
neural network and decision tree-based classification for detection of
DDoS pandemic attacks in SDN-based SCADA systems,” Sensors,
vol. 24, no. 3, p. 1040, 2024.
[14] M. A. Ferrag et al., “Edge-iiotset: A new comprehensive realistic
cyber security dataset of IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and
federated learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
[15] P. Kumari and A. K. Jain, “A comprehensive study of DDoS attacks
over iot network and their countermeasures,” Computers & Security,
vol. 127, p. 103096, 2023.
[16] G. Somani et al., “DDoS attacks in cloud computing: Collateral damage
to non-targets,” Computer Networks, vol. 109, pp. 157–171, 2016.
[17] A. A. Alahmadi et al., “Ddos attack detection in IoT-based networks
using machine learning models: a survey and research directions,”
Electronics, vol. 12, no. 14, p. 3103, 2023.
[18] A. Petukhova et al., “Text clustering with LLM embeddings,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.15112, 2024.
[19] S. Karnani et al., “A comprehensive survey on low-rate and high-rate
DDoS defense approaches in sdn: taxonomy, research challenges, and
opportunities,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 83, no. 12,
pp. 35253–35306, 2024.
[20] A. Fausto et al., “Reduction of the delays within an intrusion detection
system (IDS) based on software defined networking (SDN),” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 109850–109862, 2022.
[21] N. V . Chawla et al., “SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling tech-
nique,” Journal of artificial intelligence research, vol. 16, pp. 321–357,
2002.
2025 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication & Information Systems Security
12
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on April 21,2026 at 16:20:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
