--- PAGE 1 ---
High Fidelity Neural Audio Compression
Alexandre Défossez∗ defossez@meta.com
Meta AI, F AIR Team, Paris, France
Jade Copet∗ jadecopet@meta.com
Meta AI, F AIR Team, Paris, France
Gabriel Synnaeve† gab@meta.com
Meta AI, F AIR Team, Paris, France
Yossi Adi† adiyoss@meta.com
Meta AI, F AIR Team, Tel-Aviv, Israel
Abstract
We introduce a state-of-the-art real-time, high-ﬁdelity, audio codec leveraging neural networks.
It consists in a streaming encoder-decoder architecture with quantized latent space trained
in an end-to-end fashion. We simplify and speed-up the training by using a single multiscale
spectrogram adversary that eﬃciently reduces artifacts and produce high-quality samples.
We introduce a novel loss balancer mechanism to stabilize training: theweight of a loss now
deﬁnes the fraction of the overall gradient it should represent, thus decoupling the choice of
this hyper-parameter from the typical scale of the loss. Finally, we study how lightweight
Transformer models can be used to further compress the obtained representation by up to
40%, while staying faster than real time. We provide a detailed description of the key design
choices of the proposed model including: training objective, architectural changes and a study
of various perceptual loss functions. We present an extensive subjective evaluation (MUSHRA
tests) together with an ablation study for a range of bandwidths and audio domains, including
speech, noisy-reverberant speech, and music. Our approach is superior to the baselines
methods across all evaluated settings, considering both 24 kHz monophonic and 48 kHz
stereophonic audio. Code and models are available at github.com/facebookresearch/encodec.
1 Introduction
Recent studies suggest that streaming audio and video have accounted for the majority of the internet traﬃc
in 2021 (82% according to (Cisco, 2021)). With the internet traﬃc expected to grow, audio compression
is an increasingly important problem. In lossy signal compression we aim at minimizing the bitrate of a
sample while also minimizing the amount of distortion according to a given metric, ideally correlated with
human perception. Audio codecs typically employ a carefully engineered pipeline combining an encoder and
a decoder to remove redundancies in the audio content and yield a compact bitstream. Traditionally, this
is achieved by decomposing the input with a signal processing transform and trading oﬀ the quality of the
components that are less likely to inﬂuence perception. Leveraging neural networks as trained transforms via
an encoder-decoder mechanism has been explored by Morishima et al. (1990); Rippel et al. (2019); Zeghidour
et al. (2021). Our research work is in the continuity of this line of work, with a focus on audio signals.
The problems arising in lossy neural compression models are twofold: ﬁrst, the model has to represent a
wide range of signals, such as not to overﬁt the training set or produce artifact laden audio outside its
comfort zone. We solve this by having a large and diverse training set (described in Section 4.1), as well
as discriminator networks (see Section 3.4) that serve as perceptual losses, which we study extensively in
Section 4.5.1, Table 2. The other problem is that of compressing eﬃciently, both in compute time and in size.
∗,†Equal contribution.
1
arXiv:2210.13438v1  [eess.AS]  24 Oct 2022
--- PAGE 2 ---
Figure 1: EnCodec : an encoder decoder codec architecture which is trained with reconstruction (ℓf and
ℓt) as well as adversarial losses (ℓg for the generator andℓd for the discriminator). The residual vector
quantization commitment loss (ℓw) applies only to the encoder. Optionally, we train a small Transformer
language model for entropy coding over the quantized units withℓl, which reduces bandwidth even further.
For the former, we limit ourselves to models that run in real-time on a single CPU core. For the latter, we
use residual vector quantization of the neural encoder ﬂoating-point output, for which various approaches
have been proposed (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Zeghidour et al., 2021).
Accompanying those technical contributions, we posit that designing end-to-end neural compression models is
a set of intertwined choices, among which at least the encoder-decoder architecture, the quantization method,
and the perceptual loss play key parts. Objective evaluations exist and we report scores on them in our
ablations (Section 4.5.1). But the evaluation of lossy audio codecs necessarily relies on human perception, so
we ran extensive human evaluation for multiple points in this design space, both for speech and music. Those
evaluations (MUSHRA) consist in having humans listen to, compare, and rate excerpts of speech or music
compressed with competitive codecs and variants of our method, and the uncompressed ground truth. This
allows to compare variants of the whole pipeline in isolation, as well as their combined eﬀect, in Section 4.5.1
(Figure 3 and Table 1). Finally, our best model,EnCodec , reaches state-of-the-art scores for speech and for
music at 1.5, 3, 6, 12 kbps at 24 kHz, and at 6, 12, and 24 kbps for 48 kHz with stereo channels.
2 Related Work
Speech and Audio Synthesis.Recent advancements in neural audio generation enabled computers to
eﬃciently generate natural sounding audio. The ﬁrst convincing results were achieved by autoregressive
models such as WaveNet (Oord et al., 2016), at the cost of slow inference. While many other approaches were
explored (Yamamoto et al., 2020a; Kalchbrenner et al., 2018; Goel et al., 2022), the most relevant ones here
are those based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Kumar et al., 2019; Yamamoto et al., 2020a;
Kong et al., 2020; Andreev et al., 2022) were able to match the quality of autoregressive by combining various
adversarial networks operate at diﬀerent multi-scale and multi-period resolutions. Our work uses and extends
similar adversarial losses to limit artifacts during audio generation.
Audio Codec. Low bitrate parametric speech and audio codecs have long been studied (Atal & Hanauer,
1971; Juang & Gray, 1982), but their quality has been severely limited. Despite some advances (Griﬃn
& Lim, 1985; McCree et al., 1996), modeling the excitation signal has remained a challenging task. The
current state-of-the-art traditional audio codecs are Opus (Valin et al., 2012) and Enhanced Voice Service
(EVS) (Dietz et al., 2015). These methods produce high coding eﬃciency for general audio while supporting
various bitrates, sampling rates, and real-time compression.
2
--- PAGE 3 ---
Neural based audio codecs have been recently proposed and demonstrated promising results (Kleijn et al.,
2018; Valin & Skoglund, 2019b; Lim et al., 2020; Kleijn et al., 2021; Zeghidour et al., 2021; Omran et al.,
2022; Lin et al., 2022; Jayashankar et al., 2022; Li et al.; Jiang et al., 2022), where most methods are based on
quantizing the latent space before feeding it to the decoder. In Valin & Skoglund (2019b), an LPCNet (Valin
& Skoglund, 2019a) vocoder was conditioned on hand-crafted features and a uniform quantizer. Gârbacea
et al. (2019) conditioned a WaveNet based model on discrete units obtained from a VQ-VAE (Van Den Oord
et al., 2017; Razavi et al., 2019) model, while Skoglund & Valin (2019) tried feeding the Opus codec (Valin
et al., 2012) to a WaveNet to further improve its perceptual quality. Jayashankar et al. (2022); Jiang et al.
(2022) propose an auto-encoder with a vector quantization layer applied over the latent representation and
minimizing the reconstruction loss, while Li et al. suggested using Gumbel-Softmax (GS) (Jang et al., 2017)
for representation quantization. The most relevant related work to ours is the SoundStream model (Zeghidour
et al., 2021), in which the authors propose a fully convolutional encoder decoder architecture with a Residual
Vector Quantization (RVQ) (Gray, 1984; Vasuki & Vanathi, 2006) layers. The model was optimized using
both reconstruction loss and adversarial perceptual losses.
Audio Discretization.Representing audio and speech using discrete values was proposed to various tasks
recently. Dieleman et al. (2018); Dhariwal et al. (2020) proposed a hierarchical VQ-VAE based model for
learning discrete representation of raw audio, next combined with an auto-regressive model, demonstrating
the ability to generate high quality music. Similarly, Lakhotia et al. (2021); Kharitonov et al. (2021)
demonstrated that self-supervised learning methods for speech (e.g., HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021)), can be
quantized and used for conditional and unconditional speech generation. Similar methods were applied
to speech resynthesis (Polyak et al., 2021), speech emotion conversion (Kreuk et al., 2021), spoken dialog
system (Nguyen et al., 2022), and speech-to-speech translation (Lee et al., 2021a;b; Popuri et al., 2022).
3 Model
An audio signal of durationd can be represented by a sequencex∈ [−1, 1]Ca×T with Ca the number of
audio channels,T =d·fsr the number of audio samples at a given sample ratefsr. The EnCodec model is
composed of three main components: (i) First, an encoder networkE is input an audio extract and outputs a
latent representation z; (ii) Next, a quantization layerQ produces a compressed representationzq, using
vector quantization; (iii) Lastly, a decoder networkG reconstructs the time-domain signal, ˆx, from the
compressed latent representationzq. The whole system is trained end-to-end to minimize a reconstruction loss
applied over both time and frequency domain, together with a perceptual loss in the form of discriminators
operating at diﬀerent resolutions. A visual description of the proposed method can be seen in Figure 1.
3.1 Encoder & Decoder Architecture
The EnCodec model is a simple streaming, convolutional-based encoder-decoder architecture with sequential
modeling component applied over the latent representation, both on the encoder and on the decoder side.
Such modeling framework was shown to provide great results in various audio-related tasks, e.g., source
separation and enhancement (Défossez et al., 2019; Defossez et al., 2020), neural vocoders (Kumar et al., 2019;
Kong et al., 2020), audio codec (Zeghidour et al., 2021), and artiﬁcial bandwidth extension (Tagliasacchi
et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021). We use the same architecture for 24 kHz and 48 kHz audio.
Encoder-Decoder. The encoder modelE consists in a 1D convolution withC channels and a kernel size of
7 followed byB convolution blocks. Each convolution block is composed of a single residual unit followed by
a down-sampling layer consisting in a strided convolution, with a kernel sizeK of twice the strideS. The
residual unit contains two convolutions with kernel size 3 and a skip-connection. The number of channels
is doubled whenever down-sampling occurred. The convolution blocks are followed by a two-layer LSTM
for sequence modeling and a ﬁnal 1D convolution layer with a kernel size of 7 andD output channels.
Following Zeghidour et al. (2021); Li et al. (2021), we useC = 32,B = 4 and (2, 4, 5, 8) as strides. We use
ELU as a non-linear activation function (Clevert et al., 2015) either layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) or
weight normalization (Salimans & Kingma, 2016). We use two variants of the model, depending on whether
we target the low-latency streamable setup, or a high ﬁdelity non-streamable usage. With this setup, the
encoder outputs 75 latent steps per second of audio at 24 kHz, and 150 at 48 kHz. The decoder mirrors the
3
--- PAGE 4 ---
encoder, using transposed convolutions instead of strided convolutions, and with the strides in reverse order
as in the encoder, outputting the ﬁnal mono or stereo audio.
Non-streamable. In the non-streamable setup, we use for each convolution a total padding ofK−S,
split equally before the ﬁrst time step and after the last one (with one more before ifK−S is odd). We
further split the input into chunks of 1 seconds, with an overlap of 10 ms to avoid clicks, and normalize each
chunk before feeding it to the model, applying the inverse operation on the output of the decoder, adding a
negligible bandwidth overhead to transmit the scale. We use layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016), computing
the statistics including also the time dimension in order to keep the relative scale information.
Streamable. For the streamable setup, all padding is put before the ﬁrst time step. For a transposed
convolution with strides, we output thes ﬁrst time steps, and keep the remainings steps in memory
for completion when the next frame is available, or discarding it at the end of a stream. Thanks to this
padding scheme, the model can output 320 samples (13 ms) as soon as the ﬁrst 320 samples (13 ms) are
received. We replace the layer normalization with statistics computed over the time dimension with weight
normalization (Salimans & Kingma, 2016), as the former is ill-suited for a streaming setup. We notice a small
gain over the objective metrics by keeping a form of normalization, as demonstrated in Table A.3.
3.2 Residual Vector Quantization
We use Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) to quantize the output of the encoder as introduced by Zeghidour
et al. (2021). Vector quantization consists in projecting an input vector onto the closest entry in a codebook
of a given size. RVQ reﬁnes this process by computing the residual after quantization, and further quantizing
it using a second codebook, and so forth.
We follow the same training procedure as described by Dhariwal et al. (2020) and Zeghidour et al. (2021).
The codebook entry selected for each input is updated using an exponential moving average with a decay
of 0.99, and entries that are not used are replaced with a candidate sampled from the current batch. We
use a straight-through-estimator (Bengio et al., 2013) to compute the gradient of the encoder, e.g. as if the
quantization step was the identity function during the backward phase. Finally, a commitment loss, consisting
of the MSE between the input of the quantizer and its output, with gradient only computed with respect to
its input, is added to the overall training loss.
By selecting a variable number of residual steps at train time, a single model can be used to support multiple
bandwidth target (Zeghidour et al., 2021). For all of our models, we use at most 32 codebooks (16 for the 48
kHz models) with 1024 entries each, e.g. 10 bits per codebook. When doing variable bandwidth training, we
select randomly a number of codebooks as a multiple of 4, i.e. corresponding to a bandwidth 1.5, 3, 6, 12
or 24 kbps at 24 kHz. Given a continuous latent represention with shape[B,D,T ] that comes out of the
encoder, this procedure turns it into a discrete set of indexes[B,Nq,T ] with Nq the number of codebooks
selected. This discrete representation can changed again to a vector by summing the corresponding codebook
entries, which is done just before going into the decoder.
3.3 Language Modeling and Entropy Coding
We additionally train a small Transformer based language model (Vaswani et al., 2017) with the objective
of keeping faster than real time end-to-end compression/decompression on a single CPU core. The model
consists of 5 layers, 8 heads, 200 channels, a dimension of 800 for the feed-forward blocks, and no dropout.
At train time, we select a bandwidth and the corresponding number of codebooksNq. For a time stept, the
discrete representation obtained at timet− 1 is transformed into a continuous representation using learnt
embedding tables, one for each codebook, and which are summed. Fort = 0, a special token is used instead.
The output of the Transformer is fed intoNq linear layers with as many output channels as the cardinality of
each codebook (e.g. 1024), giving us the logits of the estimated distribution over each codebook for timet.
We thus neglect potential mutual information between the codebooks at a single time step. This allows to
speedup inference (as opposed to having one time step per codebook, or a multi-stage prediction) with a
limited impact over the ﬁnal cross entropy. Each attention layer has a causal receptive ﬁeld of 3.5 seconds,
4
