--- PAGE 1 ---
1
Error-Resilient Semantic Communication for
Speech Transmission over Packet-Loss Networks
Zhuohang Han, Jincheng Dai,Member, IEEE, Shengshi Yao,Member, IEEE, Junyi Wang,Member, IEEE, Yanlong
Li,Member, IEEE, Kai Niu,Member, IEEE, Wenjun Xu,Senior Member, IEEE, and Ping Zhang,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Real-time speech communication over wireless net-
works remains challenging, as conventional channel protection
mechanisms cannot effectively counter packet loss under strin-
gent bandwidth and latency constraints. Semantic communica-
tion has emerged as a promising paradigm for enhancing the
robustness of speech transmission by means of joint source-
channel coding (JSCC). However, its cross-layer design hinders
practical deployment due to the incompatibility with existing
digital communication systems. In this case, the robustness of
speech communication is consequently evaluated primarily by
the error-resilience to packet loss over wireless networks. To
address these challenges, we proposeGlaris, a generative latent-
prior-based resilient speech semantic communication framework
that performs resilient speech coding in the generative la-
tent space. Generative latent priors enable high-quality packet
loss concealment (PLC) at the receiver side, well-balancing
semantic consistency and reconstruction fidelity. Additionally, an
integrated error resilience mechanism is designed to mitigate
the error propagation and improve the effectiveness of PLC.
Compared with traditional packet-level forward error correction
(FEC) strategies, our new method achieves enhanced robustness
over dynamic wireless networks while reducing redundancy
overhead significantly. Experimental results on the LibriSpeech
dataset demonstrate thatGlarisconsistently outperforms existing
error-resilient codecs, achieving JSCC-level robustness while
maintaining seamless compatibility with existing systems, and it
also strikes a favorable balance between transmission efficiency
and speech reconstruction quality.
Index Terms—Semantic communication, neural speech coding,
packet loss concealment, forward error correction, efficient re-
dundancy.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
EAL-TIME speech communication has become a corner-
stone of modern digital services, including cloud-native
4G/5G voice calls, online meetings, cloud-gaming voice chat,
and voice-enabled edge applications. These latency-sensitive
scenarios demand stringent end-to-end delay guarantees and
robustness against packet loss, as the quality of experience is
highly sensitive to latency, jitter, and loss [1]. Retransmission-
based recovery, though effective in non-real-time data applica-
tions, is infeasible for interactive speech, because the round-
trip delay of automatic repeat request mechanisms typically
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
Development Program of China under Grant 2024YFF0509700; in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62371063, Grant
62321001, and Grant 62501075; in part by the Beijing Municipal Natural
Science Foundation under Grant L232047; and in part by the Beijing Nova
Program.
Zhuohang Han, Jincheng Dai, Shengshi Yao, Kai Niu, Wenjun Xu, and Ping
Zhang are with Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,
China. Junyi Wang and Yanlong Li are with the Academy of Information and
Communication, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guangxi, China.
exceeds acceptable conversational latency budget [2]. Hence,
achieving reliability within one-shot transmission remains a
key challenge for real-time speech communication systems.
Semantic communication has recently emerged as a promis-
ing paradigm to address this challenge by enabling more
robust communication under unreliable channels [3]. Semantic
communication systems often use joint source-channel coding
(JSCC) to extract and transmit high-level semantic represen-
tations across modalities such as text [4], images [5]–[7],
speech [8], and video [9]. However, this cross-layer design
makes them incompatible with standard protocol stacks and
existing modulation and coding schemes, limiting deployabil-
ity. Additionally, JSCC is typically trained for specific channel
conditions, which hinders its adaptation to dynamic wireless
environments without compromising performance. To address
these challenges, we revisit semantic communication as a
joint optimization problem of source compression and network
transmission, aiming to achieve JSCC-level robustness over
packet-loss networks using traditional physical-layer transmis-
sion. This is nontrivial, as packet loss removes entire packets
rather than corrupting individual symbols, resulting in com-
plete information loss and making error recovery significantly
more difficult than physical-layer impairments.
To address this problem, we draw inspiration from tradi-
tional error-resilience mechanisms above the network layer,
which can be broadly categorized into sender-based forward
error correction (FEC) and receiver-based packet loss conceal-
ment (PLC). Sender-based FEC introduces controlled redun-
dancy to enable packet recovery without retransmission, as in
out-of-band FEC (e.g., Reed-Solomon, fountain codes [10],
[11]), redundant encoding [12], and codec-specific in-band re-
dundancy (e.g., Opus LBRR [13]). RFC8854 [14] recommends
the use of in-band FEC when available, and out-of-band FEC
is therefore beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless, in-
band FEC like LBRR provides only single-frame protection
and is ineffective against burst or consecutive losses. Hence,
receiver-based PLC is often employed as a complementary
approach, which can be categorized as heuristic or neural.
Traditional PLC relies on waveform repetition or spectral
interpolation [2], while neural PLC employs deep generative
models [15]–[19] to reconstruct lost segments. Despite recent
progress in neural PLCs, two main limitations remain: (i) each
frame must be independently decodable to provide context
for loss prediction, which prevents the use of entropy cod-
ing, thereby limiting compression efficiency; and (ii) limited
inter-frame correlation restricts the achievable reconstruction
performance under severe or burst packet loss.
arXiv:2512.08203v1  [cs.SD]  9 Dec 2025
--- PAGE 2 ---
2
In this paper, we propose a standard-compatible semantic
communication framework that integrates sender-based in-
band FEC and receiver-based PLC into codec design, aimed
at ensuring robust speech transmission over packet-loss net-
works. Our goal is to improve reconstruction quality under
severe or burst losses for PLC, while reducing redundancy
overhead and increasing robustness to dynamic channel condi-
tions for in-band FEC. However, designing such a framework
presents two primary challenges.
The first challenge is maintaining semantic consistency
in concealed speech under packet loss for PLC. Existing
approaches [15]–[19] primarily focus on fine-grained acoustic
details but fail to model long-range dependencies in a single-
stage framework. Due to strong local correlations in speech,
these methods tend to over-rely on short-term cues, which
results in degraded phoneme and word-level coherence. To
address this issue, we introduce generative latent priors as a
regularization mechanism to guide the learning of long-range
dependencies, thereby enhancing perceptual naturalness.
The second challenge lies in balancing compression effi-
ciency with error resilience. It requires efficient in-band FEC
design and methods to suppress error propagation in entropy-
coded streams, enabling the use of entropy coding for high-
efficiency compression under packet-loss conditions. While
compression minimizes redundancy to improve efficiency,
error resilience depends on redundancy for recovery, resulting
in an intrinsic trade-off between compression efficiency and
robustness. This trade-off is pronounced in entropy-coded
streams, where symbol dependencies can cause cascading
errors. To address this, we reuse hyperprior-derived side infor-
mation as in-band FEC to provide redundancy for both entropy
decoding and PLC, thereby suppressing error propagation and
improving reconstruction fidelity under packet loss.
Recent advances in image compression [20], [21] have
adapted a tokenization and compression architecture and have
achieved remarkable rate-distortion (RD) results. Inspired by
this, we proposeGlaris, aGenerativeLatent-prior-based
ResilientSpeech semantic communication framework, which
leverages generative latent priors within a two-stage coding
architecture to achieve error-resilient speech transmission. In
the first stage, a VQ-V AE preserves fine-grained acoustic
details, enabling faithful reconstruction. In the second stage,
error-resilient transform coding with latent-prior modeling
captures long-range dependencies, enhancing both semantic
consistency and reconstruction fidelity. The hyperprior serves
as a compact and effective redundancy, functioning as in-
band FEC to: (i) guide PLC via high-level contextual cues,
(ii) suppress entropy decoding errors, and (iii) minimize
bitrate overhead by encoding latent distributions rather than
raw features. These generative latent priors, encompassing
both latent-space priors and hyperpriors, form the foundation
ofGlaris, enabling improved semantic consistency and a
favorable balance between compression efficiency and error
resilience under burst losses.
We evaluateGlarison the LibriSpeech dataset across di-
verse packet-loss conditions, including independent and iden-
tically distributed (i.i.d.) random losses, three-state Markov
channels [22], actual traces from PLC challenge dataset [23],
and COST2100 wireless channels. Experimental results
demonstrate thatGlarisachieves strong robustness against
high loss rates and long bursts, achieving a favorable balance
between compression efficiency and resilience compared with
both separation-based and JSCC-based baselines. Subjective
listening tests further confirm the perceptual benefits and
practical applicability of the proposed framework. Moreover,
real-time factor (RTF) evaluations demonstrate thatGlaris
supports real-time streaming inference, making it suitable for
deployment in real-world speech communication systems.
Our key contributions are summarized as follows:
1)Standard-Compatible Semantic Communication Frame-
work:We proposeGlaris, an error-resilient seman-
tic communication framework for speech transmission
over packet-loss networks, which performs error-resilient
transform coding in the generative latent space of a VQ-
V AE to achieve semantic consistency and high recon-
struction fidelity under packet loss.
2)Side-Information-Based Error-Resilience Enhancement:
We design an error resilience mechanism that incor-
porates side-information-based in-band FEC into PLC
design to effectively suppress error propagation and guide
accurate prediction of lost frames.
3)Controllable Redundancy: Glarisenables adaptive redun-
dancy control through side information rate and backup
frame configuration, offering efficient robustness adjust-
ment under varying channel conditions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related studies on neural speech coding and er-
ror resilience mechanisms. Section III introduces the proposed
framework, Section IV presents the experimental evaluations,
and Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATEDWORK
A. Neural Audio/Speech Coding
Neural audio/speech coding can typically be divided
into neural vocoders and end-to-end neural coding. Neural
vocoders based on WaveNet [24] apply neural networks as
the decoder to decode from traditional handcrafted features
like spectral envelope, pitch, and voicing level. LPCNet [25]
further improves efficiency by combining neural modeling
with linear prediction, achieving real-time speech coding at
1.6 kbps. To leverage the full potential of neural coding, end-
to-end neural coding has been introduced to obtain learned
features. Based on the SENet structure [26] and VQ-V AE
framework [27], a series of works [28]–[32] have been pro-
posed. SoundStream [28] trains the model with residual vector
quantization (RVQ) in an adversarial learning strategy to
improve the perceptual quality. Based on that, Encodec [29]
employs an RNN to improve the sequence modeling and trains
a small transformer to predict the distribution of codewords
to further improve the compression efficiency. Instead of
using entropy coding to improve compression efficiency, HiFi-
Codec [31] and Descript-Audio-Codec (DAC) [32] design the
new structure of RVQ with a well-designed training strategy
to improve the utilization of the codebook.
--- PAGE 3 ---
3
However, advancements in the field of learned image com-
pression [20], [33], [34] face the RD optimization using
variational methods with scalar quantization (SQ), which is
rarely explored in neural speech codecs. Several neural speech
codecs based on SQ have been proposed, but they operate at
comparatively high bitrates [35], [36]. An SQ-based neural
speech coding scheme for transmitting redundant information
in order to increase robustness against transmission errors
has been proposed by [37]. [38] applies the finite SQ in
a speech codec to ensure constant packet lengths. However,
none of the existing neural speech codecs have adopted the
tokenization and compression architecture proposed in [20],
which motivates us to introduce this structure in speech coding
to achieve efficient compression and enhanced error resilience
through dedicated mechanism design.
B. Error Resilience Mechanism
Error resilience mechanisms can be divided into sender-
based and receiver-based approaches [2]. Sender-based
mechanisms mainly include retransmission and packet-level
FEC [10], [11], while retransmission introduces unacceptable
delay for V oIP and packet-level FEC is difficult to adapt
to dynamic channel states when optimized for efficiency.
In this case, receiver-based mechanism PLC plays a more
important role in V oIP. Traditional PLC methods include zero
filling, interpolation, and comfortable background noise [2].
Nowadays, interpolation using a neural network called neural
PLC has achieved great success, especially for GAN-based
PLC [15]–[19]. However, as described in FD-PLC [39], post-
processed PLC is inherently constrained by the decoder.
DRED [37] follows a similar paradigm, since it introduces
a neural encoder to encode features of Opus into the low-
bitrate deep redundancy bitstream, and invokes neural PLC in
features when redundancy is unavailable. Similar to DRED,
further works [40]–[42] design deep redundancy schemes
based on discrete RVQ tokens for neural codecs that perform
well in the low-bitrate range. In contrast, our work leverages
the inherent hyperprior of the codec as deep redundancy,
without introducing any additional encoder or decoder, and
demonstrates its effectiveness in improving error resilience.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Overview
Glarisenhances the error resilience of speech communica-
tion systems by using generative latent priors within a two-
stage coding framework. As illustrated in the top part of
Fig. 1, a VQ-V AE first learns a generative latent representation
that captures high-level semantic information, enabling high-
fidelity reconstruction. The subsequent error-resilient trans-
form coding stage then operates on this latent space to achieve
RD optimization and enhance robustness under packet loss
conditions. The latent prior is introduced as a regulariza-
tion loss to enforce sequence-level consistency, whereas the
hyperprior provides high-level guidance for PLC. Through
the joint use of prior loss and hyperprior guidance,Glaris
achieves an effective balance between compression efficiency
and robustness under unreliable transmission.
The overall data processing flow is summarized as follows.
The input speech signalxis encoded into a generative latent
representationl=E(x)by latent encoderE(·). Next the
token sequencelis transformed into latent codey=g a(l)
by the analysis transformg a(·). The latent codeyis scalar-
quantized toy Q =Q(y), and its quantized symbols are
entropy coded for transmission over a lossy channelW(·)
along with the side informationzderived from the hyperprior
model. At the receiver side, the received latent code ˆyis
decoded by the synthesis transformg s(·)to reconstruct ˆl, and
the latent decoderD(·)generates the reconstructed speech ˆx.
The side informationznot only captures the distribution ofy
but also provides auxiliary cues for PLC, thereby improving
both efficiency and robustness. The procedure ofGlariscan
be summarized as
x
E(·)
− − − →l
ga(·)
− − − →y
Q(·)
− − − →yQ
W(·)
− − − →ˆy
gs(·)
− − − →ˆl
D(·)
− − − →ˆx.(1)
To further enhance error resilience, a side-information-based
error resilience mechanism is designed as illustrated in the
bottom part of Fig. 1. The key insight is that, for a lost
framey t, the directly encoded latentz t provides stronger
correlation and richer reconstruction cues than context frames.
To ensure reliable reception ofz t, the side information is
reused as in-band FEC, whose redundancy level can be
adaptively controlled through the bitrate ofzand backup
frame configuration. By introducing an offset in backups,
Glarisachieves robust recovery against long burst losses while
maintaining compression efficiency.
B. Two-Stage Coding
1) Generative Latent Representation:A key challenge in
learning a high-quality generative latent representation lies in
constructing a manifold-aligned latent space that preserves
the acoustic features of speech. In Glaris, this is achieved
by employing a VQ-V AE [28] as the latent audio encoder-
decoder pair. The VQ-V AE encodes high-dimensional speech
representations into a compact latent space, reducing dimen-
sionality while preserving semantic structure and perceptual
consistency. This compact space enables tractable latent priors
that are leveraged during training to enforce global sequence
consistency. The discrete codebook acts as a variational bot-
tleneck, enforcing compact and robust latent representations,
thereby enhancing both compression efficiency and error re-
silience.
2) Error-Resilient Latent Transform Coding:A straightfor-
ward way to compress the token sequencelis the VQ-indices-
map coding [28]. Although EnCodec [29] improves compres-
sion efficiency by learning the distribution of discrete indices,
transform coding enables explicit RD optimization through
variational modeling, thereby achieving higher compression
efficiency, as shown in Fig. 7. Building upon this principle,
Glarisintroduces an error-resilient latent transform coding
framework to enhance the error resilience while maintaining
compression efficiency.
The proposed architecture, illustrated in Fig. 2, employs a
dual-function entropy model that supports both entropy coding
and PLC. For each latent framel t, the analysis transformg a(·)
