--- PAGE 1 ---
IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 10, 15 MAY 2025 13525
Low-Bitrate High-Quality Digital Semantic
Communication Based on RVQGAN
Xiaojiao Chen ,J i n gW a n g, Senior Member, IEEE, Jingxuan Huang , Ming Zeng ,
Zhong Zheng , Member, IEEE, and Zesong Fei , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Digital semantic communication has attracted con-
siderable attention attributed to its potential for integration with
modern digital communication systems, which has demonstrated
signiﬁcant performance gains. However, despite its ability to
save transmission bandwidth, digital semantic communication
can degrade the performance of tasks at the receiver, particularly
in low-bitrate scenarios. In this article, we propose a novel
low-bitrate digital semantic communication method based on
a generative model for speech transmission to achieve high-
quality reconstructed speech at low-bitrate transmission. In
particular, we ﬁrst investigate a multiscale semantic codec based
on residual vector quantization with a generative adversary
network (RVQGAN) model for extracting semantic information
and obtaining high speech reconstruction quality while trans-
mitting at a low bitrate. We then, design a channel noise
suppression (CNS) module based on U-Net to alleviate the
channel effect at low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) by restoring
high-quality semantic features, which is capable of improving the
performance of the proposed method under challenging channel
conditions. Moreover, a Transformer-based code predictor is
utilized to further improve the robustness of the proposed method
by accounting for both the channel impact and reconstruction
quality. Finally, a three-stage training strategy is also presented
in this article to ensure the effective operation of the proposed
multiscale semantic codec, CNS module, and code predictor
module. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method operating at 3 kb/s can save at least 50% of bandwidth
while achieving higher speech restoration quality than the
baseline method.
Index Terms —Digital semantic communication, generative
model, low bitrate, speech transmission.
I. I NTRODUCTION
W
ITH the rapid advancement of information technology,
numerous novel Internet of Things (IoT) devices have
emerged, including virtual reality, Internet of Vehicles (IoV),
smart manufacturing, and telemedicine. The communication
requirements of these IoT applications place strict demands
on communication methods, including considerable data trans-
mission, exceptional reliability, and low latency. However,
Received 30 October 2024; revised 30 December 2024; accepted 12
January 2025. Date of publication 13 February 2025; date of current version
9 May 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2902003, and
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62201044. (Corresponding author: Jingxuan Huang.)
The authors are with the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: xiaojiaochen76@
gmail.com; wangjing@bit.edu.cn; jxhbit@gmail.com; mzengzm@163.com;
zhong.zheng@bit.edu.cn; feizesong@bit.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3534462
existing communication systems face signiﬁcant challenges
due to limited bandwidth and spectrum resources [1].I n
addition, most IoT devices typically have low bandwidth,
which imposes requirements for low-bitrate transmission on
communication systems [2]. As an emerging communication
method, semantic communication technology, which conveys
semantic information rather than data or signals, is expected
to effectively address these challenges in the future.
Researchers are increasingly exploring the potential of
semantic communication systems [3], [4], [5], [6]. This trend
is due to the signiﬁcant difference between semantic commu-
nication and traditional communication: it focuses not only
on the reliable transmission of data but also on the accuracy
of downstream tasks at the receiver. By accurately transmit-
ting from symbol to meaning, semantic communication can
transmit only semantically relevant information, signiﬁcantly
increasing communication efﬁciency.
Deep learning technology has evolved into the founda-
tion of semantic communication as artiﬁcial intelligence
has advanced. Researchers have investigated various modal-
ities in semantic communication systems, such as the
transmission of images [3], [7], [8],t e x t [4], [9], [10], and
speech [5], [10], [11], in both single-modal and multimodal
settings. Compared to images and text, speech is one of
the most fundamental forms of human communication, capa-
ble of accurately conveying the content and emotions that
both parties wish to express, making it indispensable. Thus,
researching how to transmit speech signals efﬁciently is critical
to the advancement of semantic communication.
Several studies [5], [11], [12], [13] have been conducted
on semantic speech transmission, with the primary goal of
ensuring high-quality recovered speech signals at the receiver.
Weng and Qin [5] ﬁrst proposed a deep-learning-based seman-
tic communication system known as DeepSC-S. This system
employs an attention module to extract relevant semantic
information and optimizes the model through joint semantic-
channel coding, facilitating the restoration of the speech signal
at the receiver. Wei et al. [13] developed a streaming semantic
communication system aimed at real-time speech transmission.
This system utilizes Transformer-XL for semantic information
extraction and incorporates a chunk-based masked attention
mechanism to enhance transmission quality while minimizing
latency. In [12], a multiuser speech semantic communication
system leveraging federated learning is proposed, which sig-
niﬁcantly enhances both the accuracy and efﬁciency of speech
transmission. Deep speech semantic transmission (DSST) [11]
2327-4662 c⃝ 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence
and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on January 25,2026 at 06:52:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
13526 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 12, NO. 10, 15 MAY 2025
is introduced for end-to-end speech transmission over wireless
channels. DSST features a nonlinear transformation that maps
speech sources to a semantic latent space, subsequently feed-
ing these semantic features into the source channel encoder to
produce channel input sequences. In [14], a Transformer-based
semantic communication system for speech is introduced.
Although these methods have improved bandwidth saving and
recovery performance, they still have limitations as they do
not transmit digital bits. These methods are challenging to
integrate with modern digital communication systems, and
existing mature and efﬁcient digital communication technolo-
gies cannot be fully utilized.
Vector quantization (VQ) based on semantic communi-
cation systems [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] is proposed to
improve compatibility with digital communication systems.
Zhou et al. [15] proposed a multilevel codebook-assisted
digital generative semantic communication to address the
incompatibility between conventional VQ and digital constel-
lation modulation, as well as the mismatch between code
indices and code vectors. Fu et al. [16] designed a VQ-based
semantic communication system for image transmission called
VQ-DeepSC, which extracts semantic features from UNet
structures and compresses them into bitstreams before trans-
mission. Zhang et al. [17] proposed a uniﬁed codebook by
employing a VQ-based mechanism to support digital com-
munication and reduce transmission overhead. Xie et al. [18]
proposed a task-oriented communication scheme with digital
modulation, and the concept of a robust information bottleneck
was introduced to enable robust model training across various
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) levels. VQ-DeepVSC, as presented
in [19], introduces an adaptive keyframe extraction and inter-
polation (AKEI) module to minimize temporal redundancy,
along with a multichannel spatially conditioned VQ (MSVQ)
for the ﬁnal compression of keyframes in a video. The afore-
mentioned studies have shown that the VQ mechanism can be
effective in digital semantic communication systems. However,
given the constraints of limited bandwidth resources in IoT,
more in-depth research is required to advance digital semantic
communication systems in low-bandwidth environments.
Recently, IoT communication technology has also attracted
the attention of researchers [20], [21], [22], [23], [24].T h e
integration of generative artiﬁcial intelligence (GAI) mod-
els with various IoT devices has demonstrated enormous
potential, allowing for more efﬁcient and intelligent IoT
applications. At the same time, generative-based semantic
communication systems have attracted signiﬁcant research
attention [20], [21], [22].I n [20], a joint source–channel cod-
ing scheme using StyleGAN was proposed for semantic image
transmission. In [21], a joint coding-modulation framework
based on V AE was introduced for digital semantic commu-
nication. Similarly, Grassucci et al. [22] presented an audio
semantic communication framework using a latent diffusion
model conditioned on textual semantics. These studies demon-
strate the ability of generative models to produce high-quality
recovery signals in semantic communication.
Building on the aforementioned observations, this article
proposes a digital semantic communication method based
on a generative model, which is designed to achieve high
reconstruction quality at a low bitrate. The bandwidth bur-
den could be signiﬁcantly reduced owing to the low-bitrate
transmission, and the proposed method can be applied to
digital communication with a high reconstruction quality.
Speciﬁcally, we present a three-stage training strategy. In
the ﬁrst stage, a multiscale codec is pretrained to precisely
extract semantic information with low bitrate and obtain high
reconstructed speech quality. In the second stage, the channel
noise suppression (CNS) module is trained to mitigate the
impact of the channel on system performance in a low SNR
channel condition. In the third stage, a Transformer-based code
predictor module is ﬁnetuned with the semantic decoder to
improve the performance of the proposed method.
The main contributions of this article are summarized as
follows.
1) This article proposes a digital semantic communication
system based on RVQGAN, which aims at recovering
high-quality speech at the receiver while transmitting
at a low rate. This method takes into account the
compatibility with digital communication systems as
well as the bandwidth burden.
2) We propose a multiscale semantic codec based on
RVQGAN to precisely extract semantic information
with low bitrate and produce high-quality speech at the
receiver, which can effectively save the transmission
bandwidth and integrate with digital communications by
bitstream.
3) To mitigate the impact of the channel on system
performance, we design a CNS module that removes
channel interference from the semantic features at the
receiver as much as possible, consequently improving
system performance under low SNR and alleviating
the cliff effect. We introduce a Transformer-based code
predictor at the receiver to further improve reconstructed
quality.
4) To verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach,
extensive experiments are conducted in the speech
reconstruction task. The experimental results show
that the proposed approach outperforms the baseline
methods in both transmission rate and reconstruction
performance.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In
Section II, we introduced the proposed semantic communi-
cation system model. Section III elaborates on the proposed
multiscale semantic codec to achieve the low bitrate. In
Section IV, we introduce the proposed low-bitrate digital
semantic communication method in detail. Experimental setup
and results are presented, respectively, in Sections V and VI.
Section VII is the conclusion of this article.
II. S
YSTEM MODEL
In this section, we present a digital semantic commu-
nication framework. As shown in Fig. 1,t h i sf r a m e w o r k
mainly includes an encoder, a digital modulation scheme, a
wireless channel, and a decoder. Speciﬁcally, in order to adapt
the digital communication scheme, the encoder ﬁrst extracts
semantic information from the source signal and quantizes it
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on January 25,2026 at 06:52:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
CHEN et al.: LOW-BITRATE HIGH-QUALITY DIGITAL SEMANTIC COMMUNICATION BASED ON RVQGAN 13527
Fig. 1. System model of the proposed digital semantic communication.
to obtain a bitstream. Then, the bitstream is modulated by a
digital modulation scheme and sent to the receiver through
the wireless channel. Finally, the received data is demodulated
to obtain the semantic feature and then semantic features are
decoded to reconstruct the sent source information through the
decoder.
A. Encoder
Given the input data S ∈ R
1×T , where T is the length of
input data, the encoder ﬁrst utilizes a semantic encoder to
extract semantic features from S and a quantizer is adopted to
transform semantic features into bits stream Z
q which can be
expressed by
Zq = fe(S) = Q(ge(S)) (1)
where fe(·) include the semantic encoder ge(·) and quantizer
Q(·) with learnable parameters. The output of the semantic
encoder Z = ge(S), which is a series of continuous semantic
features, cannot be directly transmitted to digital communica-
tion. Hence, the quantizer Q(·) is adopted to map the semantic
feature Z into the bitstream Zq.
B. Modulation and Wireless Channel
Then, the bitstream Zq is modulated by a digital modulation
scheme, which can be a traditional method (e.g., BPSK, QAM,
etc.), and transmitted over a wireless channel. This article
considers a general model of fading channels with the function
denoted as follows
Y = h ∗X + n (2)
where h denotes the channel state information (CSI) vector,
n ∼ N(0,σ
2I) is an independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) Gaussian noise vector with variance σ2 for each
channel, and I is the identity matrix.
Subsequently, the received signal Y is demodulated to
recover the bitstream ˆZq via a demodulator.
C. Decoder
After demodulation of the received signal Y, the decoder
obtains the bitstream ˆZq. The bitstream will ﬁrst be dequan-
tized to recover the semantic features. Subsequently, the
semantic decoder will reconstruct the transmitted signal ˆS from
semantic features, which can be formulated by
ˆS = fd
(
ˆZq
)
= gd
(
Q−1( ˆZq)
)
(3)
where fd(·) include the semantic decoder gd(·) and dequantizer
Q(·) with learnable parameters. In order to obtain the recon-
structed signal ˆS, the output of the dequantizer ˆZ = Q−1( ˆZq),
which is a series of continuous semantic features, is directly
transmitted to the semantic decoder.
To design an effective semantic communication system,
the optimization goal is to minimize the semantic distortion
between the transmitter and receiver while enhancing the task
performance at the receiver. Speciﬁcally, the mean-square error
(MSE) function is adopted to measure the semantic distortion
and the task performance, which can be computed as
L
sem =∥ Z − ˆZ∥2
2 (4)
Ltask = 1
T ∥ ˆS − S∥2
2 (5)
where Lsem and Ltask denote the semantic distortion and the
task performance, respectively. To achieve these objectives,
the overall optimization objective is formulated as a joint
loss function, incorporating both semantic distortion and task
performance at the receiver, which can be expressed as
min
θ
αLsem + βLtask (6)
where θ is the parameter of the encoder and decoder; α and β
are hyperparameters; and Lsem and Ltask denote the semantic
distortion and the task performance, respectively.
III. M ULTISCALE SEMANTIC CODEC AT LOW BITRATE
In this section, we ﬁrst develop a low-bitrate multiscale
semantic codec that delivers high-quality decoded speech.
As shown in Fig. 2, this module includes semantic codec,
quantizer, and discriminator. Then, the training strategy will
be introduced.
A. Multiscale Semantic Codec
In order to implement a digital semantic communication
system for low bitrate transmission with high reconstruction
quality, we propose a multiscale semantic codec module based
on RVQGAN, an encoder–decoder network with residual VQ
(RVQ) [25], [26], [27]. The multiscale semantic codec is a
generative model primarily composed of a semantic encoder,
a quantizer, and a semantic decoder. It operates by gener-
ating high-quality semantic features, which are subsequently
quantized, dequantized, and decoded to produce high-quality
reconstructed audio. During training, the process is guided and
constrained by a discriminator. Speciﬁcally, this module ﬁrst
performs semantic feature extraction on the input signal at
the receiver. Then, in order to adapt to the existing digital
communication systems, the continuous semantic features are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on January 25,2026 at 06:52:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
