--- PAGE 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
SPEECH TOKENIZER : U NIFIED SPEECH TOKENIZER FOR
SPEECH LANGUAGE MODELS
Xin Zhang∗, Dong Zhang ∗, Shimin Li, Yaqian Zhou †, Xipeng Qiu †
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
{xin_zhang22,dongzhang22}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{smli20,zhouyaqian,xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn
https://0nutation.github.io/SpeechTokenizer.github.io/
ABSTRACT
Current speech large language models build upon discrete speech representations,
which can be categorized into semantic tokens and acoustic tokens. However,
existing speech tokens are not specifically designed for speech language mod-
eling. To assess the suitability of speech tokens for building speech language
models, we established the first benchmark, SLMTokBench. Our results indicate
that neither semantic nor acoustic tokens are ideal for this purpose. Therefore, we
propose SpeechTokenizer, a unified speech tokenizer for speech large language
models. SpeechTokenizer adopts the Encoder-Decoder architecture with residual
vector quantization (RVQ). Unifying semantic and acoustic tokens, SpeechTok-
enizer disentangles different aspects of speech information hierarchically across
different RVQ layers. Furthermore, We construct a Unified Speech Language
Model (USLM) leveraging SpeechTokenizer. Experiments show that SpeechTok-
enizer performs comparably to EnCodec in speech reconstruction and demonstrates
strong performance on the SLMTokBench benchmark. Also, USLM outperforms
V ALL-E in zero-shot Text-to-Speech tasks. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/ZhangXInFD/SpeechTokenizer/.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023) have demonstrated remarkable per-
formance on various natural language processing tasks. This has inspired numerous works to build
speech language models (Borsos et al., 2022), which have achieved significant breakthroughs across
various speech processing tasks (Wang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Rubenstein et al., 2023;
Dong et al., 2023). A key commonality among these works is the utilization of discrete speech
representations. Current discrete speech representations can be categorized into two types: semantic
tokens and acoustic tokens (Borsos et al., 2022). Semantic tokens are typically from self-supervised
pre-trained models with masked language modeling as training objective (Hsu et al., 2021; Baevski
et al., 2020; Chung et al., 2021). Derived through k-means clustering on representations from a
specific intermediate layer, semantic tokens are depicted as sequences with one-dimensional structure.
Acoustic tokens can be extracted from neural audio codecs with reconstruction as training objec-
tive (Zeghidour et al., 2021; Défossez et al., 2022). Utilizing residual vector quantization (RVQ) with
hierarchical quantizers for discretization, acoustic tokens are represented as matrices consisting of
two dimensions: timesteps and quantizers.
Building upon two speech tokens, there exist three modeling approaches for speech language models,
as listed in Table 1: i) Semantic language models are constructed using semantic tokens and employ
an external unit vocoder for speech synthesis. (Lakhotia et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023; Hassid
et al., 2023). While capturing semantically accurate content, their speech generation results in poor
∗Equal contribution. Order is random
†Corresponding author
1
arXiv:2308.16692v2  [cs.CL]  23 Jan 2024
--- PAGE 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
AR
NAR concat
Decoder
T
Q
HuBERT
W2VBERT
...
SoundStream
Encodec
...
SpeechTokenizer
Content Timbre, ...
Semantic tokensAcoustic tokens Unified tokens
Q
T
Q
T
Content, Timbre, ...
(a) Different Speech Tokens (b) Unified Speech Language Model
Figure 1: Left: Illustration of information composition of different discrete speech representations.
Right: Illustration of unified speech language models. AR refers to autoregressive and NAR refers to
non-autoregressive. Speech tokens are represented as colored circles and different colors represent
different information.
Accurate ContentHigh-quality SpeechSingle Tokenzier
Semantic LM √ × √
Acoustic LM × √ √
Hierarchical LM√ √ ×USLM (ours) √ √ √
Table 1: Comparision between different speech language models. Semantic LM refers to semantic
language models. Acoustic LM refers to acoustic language models. Hierarchical LM refers to
hierarchical speech language models. USLM refers to our unified speech language model.
quality and a loss of acoustic details. ii) Acoustic language models are built on acoustic tokens.
Taking V ALL-E (Wang et al., 2023) as an example, despite achieving impressive zero-shot text-to-
speech (TTS) capabilities, it still suffers from problems like inaccurate content, due to the complex
information within acoustic tokens. iii) Hierarchical speech language models comprise semantic
token language models and acoustic token language models, which capture content information and
acoustic details respectively (Borsos et al., 2022; Rubenstein et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023). This
structure shows promising results in both content and speech quality, but the multi-stage modeling
approach is more complex, leading to several drawbacks such as error accumulation and slower
processing speed. Additionally, there is significant information redundancy between semantic tokens
and acoustic tokens, which introduces unnecessary modeling complexities. An ideal speech language
model should not only accurately model content, but also generating diverse, high-quality speech,
while maintaining an architecture of elegant simplicity. Correspondingly, ideal speech tokens should
meet the following two key characteristics: i) Strong alignment with text; ii) Effective preservation of
speech information.
However, existing speech tokens are not explicitly designed for speech language modeling, and there
has been no exploration into their suitability for building speech language models. To address this
gap, we build Speech Language Model Token Benchmark, to assess the suitability of speech tokens
for constructing speech language models. Our evaluation reveals that semantic tokens exhibit a
high alignment with text while losing some information in speech, such as timbre. Acoustic tokens
excel in preserving speech information effectively but do not demonstrate a strong alignment with
text. With these observations, we aim to build a specialized speech tokens designed for speech
language models by unifying semantic and acoustic tokens. Specifically, we can conduct information
disentanglement in the RVQ structure of acoustic tokens, enabling the first RVQ quantizer to generate
tokens containing content information, similar to semantic tokens, while the subsequent quantizers
complement the remaining paralinguistic information, as illustrated in Figure 1.
With the above motivation, we propose SpeechTokenizer, a unified speech tokenizer for speech large
language models. SpeechTokenizer adopts the Encoder-Decoder architecture with residual vector
quantization. Unifying semantic and acoustic tokens, SpeechTokenizer disentangles different aspects
of speech information hierarchically across different RVQ layers. By employing a semantic teacher to
guide the first RVQ quantizer, the first layer tokens can effectively capture content information. With
residual structure, the subsequent quantizers complement the remaining paralinguistic information.
2
--- PAGE 3 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Building upon SpeechTokenizer, we build aUnified Speech Language Model consisting of autore-
gressive and non-autoregressive models. Experimental results show that SpeechTokenizer performs
comparably to EnCodec (Défossez et al., 2022) in speech reconstruction and demonstrates strong
performance on the SLMTokBench benchmark. The USLM notably outperforms V ALL-E (Wang
et al., 2023) in zero-shot Text-to-Speech (TTS) tasks.
Our contributions include the following:
• We propose SpeechTokenizer, which is specially designed for speech large language models
and unify the semantic and acoustic tokens through disentangling different aspects of speech
information hierarchically.
• We establish SLMTokBench, the first benckmark to assess the suitability of speech tokens for
constructing speech language models.
• We construct a unified speech language model based on SpeechTokenizer, which outperforms
V ALL-E on zero-shot TTS task.
2 SLMT OKBENCH : S PEECH LANGUAGE MODEL TOKEN BENCHMARK
To build powerful speech language models, discrete speech representations should possess the fol-
lowing two key characteristics: i) Strong alignment with text; ii) Effective preservation of speech
information. Building on this premise, we establish speech Language Model Token Benchmark (SLM-
TokBench) to assess the suitability of speech tokens for constructing speech language models.
2.1 T EXT ALIGNMENT EVALUATION
We evaluate the degree of text alignment by estimating the mutual information between speech tokens
and text. For notation, X denotes discrete speech representations; Y denotes text; I(X; Y) denotes
the mutual information; test dataset is denoted as D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 and θ denotes the downstream
model. Through the derivation in Appendix A, we can estimate I(X; Y) as:
ˆI(X; Y) = 1
N 2
NX
i=1
NX
j=1
[log qθ(yi|xi) − log qθ(yj|xi)]
where qθ(Y|X) is the variational distribution and can be parameterized by the downstream model θ.
The downstream model is a vanilla 2-layer 1024-unit BLSTM optimized by CTC loss on characters
and it takes speech tokens as inputs. Specifically, for each discrete representation, we first establish
an embedding matrix, which can be either randomly initialized or derived from the k-means centroid
matrix or vector quantization codebooks obtained during the discretization process. We use the
embedding matrix to embed the discrete representations and obtain continuous representations, which
are then fed into the downstream models. We train the downstream model on LibriSpeech train-clean-
100 subset and use dev-clean subset for estimating mutual information. We also calculate the word
error rate (WER) on the test set. For downstream model training, we configure the training setup with
a batch size of 32, a learning rate of 1e-4, and a total of 200k global steps.
2.2 I NFORMATION PRESERVATION EVALUATION
To evaluate the preservation of speech information in discrete speech representations, we convert
speech tokens back to speech and evaluate resynthesized speech by automatic metrics on content and
timbre. We train a unit-HiFIGAN (Polyak et al., 2021) on LibriSpeech dataset to convert HuBERT
units to waveform. Notably, to avoid interference from additional information, we don’t supply
any speaker information during training. For Encodec tokens, we used the Encodec decoder to
directly produce the waveform. Content preservation is evaluated by computing the WER through
transcribing the resynthesized speech using the Whisper en-medium model (Radford et al., 2023).
Timbre preservation is evaluated by utilizing WavLM-TDNN (Chen et al., 2022) to calculate speaker
similarity between the synthesized and groundtruth speech. We randomly sample 300 speech samples
from LibriSpeech test set for evaluation.
3
--- PAGE 4 ---
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Encoder
VQ1
VQ2
VQ8...
Decoder
HuBERT
    Semantic Distillation
Discriminator
Quantizer
Teacher
Student
module for training only  
dataflow in training only 
Figure 2: Illustration of SpeechTokenizer framework.
2.3 C OMPARING SEMANTIC & ACOUSTIC TOKENS
We use HuBERT L9 units to represent semantic tokens and EnCodec codes to represent acoustic
tokens. As shown in Table 3, semantic tokens achieve high mutual information with text but their
resynthesized speech has low speaker similarity. Acoustic tokens achieve low WER and high speaker
similarity for resynthesized speech but have low mutual information with text.
3 S PEECH TOKENIZER
3.1 M ODEL STRUCTURE
Our model is built on the framework of RVQ-GANs, following the same pattern as Sound-
Stream(Zeghidour et al., 2021) and EnCodec(Défossez et al., 2022). As depicted in Figure2, our
model uses the convolutional-based encoder-decoder network from EnCodec, which performs tem-
poral downscaling with a chosen striding factor. Notably, we have substituted the two-layer LSTM,
originally following the convolution blocks in the EnCodec encoder, with a two-layer BiLSTM
to augment the semantic modeling ability. We conduct ablation studies of model structure in Ap-
pendix B. We quantize the encoder outputs using Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ), a method that
can operate quantizes residuals following an initial quantization steps with distinct codebook. Further
details of model structure can be found in Appendix D. During training, a semantic teacher provides
semantic representation to guide the residual quantization process.
3.2 S EMANTIC DISTILLATION
To achieve a hierarchical modeling of diverse information across different RVQ layers, we employ
semantic guidance for the first quantizer, enabling it to capture content information. Leveraging
a residual structure enables the subsequent quantizers to complement the remaining paralinguistic
information.
We employ HuBERT (Hsu et al., 2021) as our semantic teacher in this study, as HuBERT is demon-
strated to encompass substantial content information (Mohamed et al., 2022). We introduce two types
of distillation: continuous representation distillation and pseudo-label prediction.
For continuous representation distillation, we employ the 9th layer HuBERT representation or the
average representation across all HuBERT layers as semantic teachers. The training objective is to
maximize the cosine similarity at the dimension level across all timesteps between the outputs of
RVQ first layer and semantic teacher representations. Formally, the continuous distillation loss is
4
