--- PAGE 1 ---
WIRELESS DEEP SPEECH SEMANTIC TRANSMISSION
Zixuan Xiao ⋆, Shengshi Yao⋆, Jincheng Dai ⋆, Sixian Wang⋆, Kai Niu ⋆†, Ping Zhang ⋆
⋆ Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China
† Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518067, China
Email: daijincheng@bupt.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose a new class of high-efﬁciency semantic
coded transmission methods to realize end-to-end speech transmis-
sion over wireless channels. We name the whole system as Deep
Speech Semantic Transmission (DSST) . Speciﬁcally, we introduce a
nonlinear transform to map the speech source to semantic latent s-
pace and feed semantic features into source-channel encoder to gen-
erate the channel-input sequence. Guided by the variational model-
ing idea, we set an entropy model on the latent space to estimate the
importance diversity among semantic feature embeddings. Accord-
ingly, these semantic features of different importance can be rea-
sonably allocated with different coding rates, which maximizes the
system coding gain. Furthermore, we introduce a channel signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) adaptation mechanism such that a single model
can be applied over various channel states. The end-to-end opti-
mization of our model leads to a ﬂexible rate-distortion (RD) trade-
off, supporting an adaptive rate wireless speech semantic transmis-
sion. Experimental results verify that our DSST system clearly out-
performs current engineered speech transmission systems on both
objective and subjective metrics. Compared with existing neural
speech semantic transmission methods, our model saves up to 75 %
of channel bandwidth costs when achieving the same quality. Audio
samples are available at https://ximoo123.github.io/DSST.
Index Terms — Semantic communications, speech transmis-
sion, nonlinear transform source-channel coding, RD trade-off.
1. INTRODUCTION
State-of-the-art (SOTA) engineered speech transmission methods
over the wireless channel can usually be separated into two steps:
source coding and channel coding [1]. Source coding performs a
linear transform on the waveform, which removes redundancy and
decorrelate, and channel coding provides error-correction against
imperfect wireless channels. However, the optimality of separation-
based schemes holds only in the asymptotic limit of inﬁnite source
and channel blocklengths, which is impossible in actual communica-
tion scenarios. Moreover, the cliff effect exists in separation-based
schemes where the performance breaks down when the channel
capacity goes below the communication rate.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62293481, Grant 92067202, Grant
62001049, and Grant 62071058, Beijing Natural Science Foundation un-
der Grant 4222012, BUPT Excellent Ph.D. Students Foundation under Grant
CX2022146. Corresponding author: Jincheng Dai, Kai Niu.
Hence, it is very time to bridge source and channel coding to
boost end-to-end communications performance. Conventional joint
source-channel coding (JSCC) methods are based on statistical prob-
abilities while ignoring source semantic aspects. With the develop-
ment of deep learning, a growing number of researchers are devoted
to using neural network to extract semantic features and realize JSC-
C for efﬁcient semantic transmission [2–4]. In this paper, we focus
on speech transmission. Recent study DeepSC-S [5] employs the
same method to accurately transmit speech waveform, showing the
potential of joint coding schemes. However, they encode pulse code
modulation (PCM) signals directly without removing the decorre-
late between samples as in SOTA schemes, which leads to a colossal
waste of bandwidth.
To address these shortcomings, we aim to integrate the ad-
vantages of classical transfer schemes and deep learning to realize
a high-efﬁciency end-to-end deep speech semantic transmission
(DSST). Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst introduce a nonlinear transform to
extract waveform semantic features [6–8]. Then, we develop the
Transformer architecture [9] to encode semantic features to the
channel input symbols directly. Particularly, to get a higher coding
gain, we estimate the importance of semantic features by a learn-
able entropy model and feed the value into the encoder to guide the
assignment of coding rate more reasonably accordingly. The whole
system is formulated as an optimization problem aiming to mini-
mize the end-to-end rate-distortion (RD) performance. It achieves
the highest possible performance at any given transmission rate.
Finally, we verify the performance of DSST across various chan-
nel conditions. Compared with the widely used classical separate
schemes adaptive multi-rate wideband (AMR-WB) + 5G LDPC, O-
pus + 5G LDPC [10–12], our model gets a noticeable improvement
in both objective scores and subjective scores across almost band-
width consumptions and signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) under addi-
tive white gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and COST2100 fading
channel [13]. In addition, our model outperforms the existing neural
method DeepSC-S in these two evaluation metrics. With a similar
objective score, our model saves up 75% of the bandwidth cost.
2. OUR PROPOSED DSST SYSTEM
2.1. Architecture
Our network architecture, shown in Fig. 1, comprises a semantic
transform network, a prior codec, and a Deep JSCC codec. Giv-
en a speech sample x in time domain, it is ﬁrst transformed into
semantic latent representation y in the semantic feature domain by
a DNN-based nonlinear analysis transform ga. Then, the latent fea-
ture y is fed into both prior encoderha and JSCC encoderfe. On the
ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) | 978-1-7281-6327-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10094680
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 06:23:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Wireless 
Channel 
Wireless 
Channel 
Side Information Transmission Link 
(Optional) 
Semantic Analysis 
Transform 
Semantic Analysis 
Transform Prior Encoder Prior Encoder 
Prior Decoder Prior Decoder 
Entropy Model Entropy Model 
JSCC Encoder JSCC Encoder 
Wireless 
Channel 
Wireless 
Channel 
JSCC Decoder JSCC Decoder 
Prior Decoder Prior Decoder Semantic Synthesis 
Transform 
Semantic Synthesis 
Transform 
Fig. 1. The architecture of DSST.
one hand,ha captures the temporal dependencies of y and utilizes a
learnable entropy model to characterize the semantic importance of
rate allocation. On the other hand,fe encodes y as channel-input se-
quence s for transmission over the wireless channel directly and the
received sequence is ˆs. In this paper, we consider AWGN channel
and COST2100 wireless fading channel, such that ˆs can be written
as ˆs =W (s|h) = h⊙ s + n, where h is the CSI vector,⊙ is the
element-wise product and n denotes the noise vector, it is indepen-
dently sampled from Gaussian distribution, i.e. n∼CN (0,σ 2
nI).
The structure of the receiver is with a mirrored architecture. As illus-
trated in Fig. 1,fd is the Deep JSCC decoder which aims to recover
latent representation ˆy,gs is semantic synthesis transform for recon-
structing source signals ˆx andhs is prior decoder. Hence, the total
link of the DSST system is formulated as follows:
x
ga(·)
−−−→y
fe(·)
−−−→s
W (·|h)
−−−−→ˆs
fd(·)
−−−→ˆy
gs(·)
−−−→ˆx
with the latent prior y
ha(·)
−−−→z
hs(·)
−−−→{µ, σ}.
(1)
Moreover, we design an optional transmission according to the actu-
al channel situation. When the channel capacity is large enough, we
transmit the side informationz to the receiver by reliable digital cod-
ing schemes as a hyperprior to acquire higher decoding gain. When
there is a shortage of channel capacity,z will not be transmitted, and
the system performance will be slightly degraded as a result.
2.2. Variational Modeling and Source-Channel Coding
In our intuition, the speech signal at the silent time almost carries
few information. Therefore, signals with zero magnitudes should be
allocated less channel bandwidth and vice versa. If we assign the
same coding rate for semantic features of all frames, the coding ef-
ﬁciency cannot be maximized. To tackle this problem, we design an
entropy model to accurately estimate the distribution of y such that
it evaluates the importance of different semantic features. Moreover,
we try to make the Deep JSCC encoder able to aware of the seman-
tic characteristics of the source and reasonably allocate coding rate
according to the semantic importance.
Our entropy model is illustrated in the middle part of Fig. 1. Fol-
lowing the work of [8], the semantic featurey is variational modeled
as a multivariate Gaussian with the mean µ and the standard devia-
tion σ. Thus the true posterior distribution of y can be modeled by
a fully factorized density model as:
py|z(y|z) =
∏
i
(
N (yi|µi,σ i)∗U (−1
2, 1
2)
)
(yi)
with (µ, σ) =hs(z),
(2)
where∗ is convolutional operation,U denotes a uniform distribution,
it utilized to match the prior to the marginal such that the estimated
entropy− logpy|z(y|z) is non-negative. During optimizing, the
actual distributionqy|z created byha will gradually approximate the
true distributionpy|z, hence the entropy model estimates distribution
of y accurately. The entropy value of each frame− logpyi|z(yi|z)
will be fed into JSCC encoder and guides the allocation of coding
rate accordingly. If the entropy model indicates yi of high entropy,
the encoder will allocate more resources to transmit it. The total
channel bandwidth costK for transmitting y can be written as:
K =
B∑
i=1
¯kyi =
B∑
i=1
Q(kyi) =
B∑
i=1
Q(−ηy logpyi|z(yi|z)), (3)
whereB is the number of frames of the speech signal, ηy is a hy-
perparameter to balance channel bandwidth cost from the estimated
entropy, ¯kyi is the bandwidth consumption of frame i,Q denotes a
scalar quantization whose range includesn integers.
2.3. Optimization Goal
The optimization goal of the DSST system is to attain an RD trade-
off between channel bandwidth cost and speech reconstruction qual-
ity. It is proven by Ball ´ ethat it is more reasonable to model the
whole model as a variational autoencoder [8], such that minimiz-
ing the KL divergence is equivalent to optimizing the model for RD
performance. Hence, the goal of inference model is creating a vari-
ational densityqˆs,˜z|x to approximate the true posterior pˆs,˜z|x. The
RD function can be approximated as
LRD = Ex∼pxDKL[qˆs,˜z|x||pˆs,˜z|x]⇔ Ex∼px Eˆs,˜z∼qˆs,˜z|x
[(− logp˜z(˜z)− logpˆs|˜z(ˆs|˜z)) + Ey∼py|ˆs,˜z[logpx|y(x|y)]].
(4)
The ﬁrst term is seen to be identical to the cross entropy be-
tween the marginal q˜z(˜z) = Ex∼px Eˆs∼qˆs|x[qˆs,˜z|x(ˆs, ˜z|x)] and
the priorp˜z(˜z), it represents the cost of encoding the side informa-
tion assuming p˜z as the entropy model. Note p˜z(˜z) is modeled as
non-parametric fully factorized density [8] as
p ˜z(˜z) =
∏
i
(
pzi|ψ(i)(ψ(i))∗U (−1
2, 1
2)
)
, (5)
where ψ(i) encapsulates all the parameters of pzi|ψ(i). In addition,
to allow optimization via gradient descent during model training
phase [7], z is added an uniform offset o instead of scalar quanti-
zation ¯z =⌊z⌉, i.e. ˜z = z + o withoi∼U
(
− 1
2, 1
2
)
.
The second term is similar to the ﬁrst term, representing the cost
of encoding ˆs and denoting the transmission rate of the speech sig-
nal. In practice, we utilize the intermediate proxy variable y to de-
rivepˆs|˜z. During the transmission process, y is directly fed into the
JSCC encoder and channel without quantization. The process can be
described as
pˆs|˜z =W (ps|˜z|h) =W (fe(py|˜z)|h). (6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 06:23:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Split 
... 
FC FC 
FC 
FC FC 
SNR 
Token 
... Rate 
Tokens 
Transformer Block 
... 
... 
... 
... 
PowerNorm 
FC FC ... FC FC FC FC Auxiliary FC 
Heads 
Fig. 2 . The architecture of the adaptive rate Deep JSCC encoder.
The structure of Deep JSCC decoder is with a mirrored architecture.
Thus, the densitypˆs|˜z can be approximated tops|˜z and transformed
to py|˜z. Similarly, z is added an uniform offset instead of scalar
quantization, the transmission rate is constrained proportionally to
− logPy|z(y|z).
The third term represents the log-likelihood of recovering x.
Based on the above analysis, the RD function can be simpliﬁed to
LRD = Ex∼px[−ηy logpy|z(y|z)−ηz logp˜z(˜z) +λd(x, ˆx)],
(7)
where the Lagrange multiplier λ determines the tradeoff between
the wireless transmission total bandwidth costR and the end-to-end
distortionD.ηy andηz are two hyperparameters to balance channel
bandwidth consumption of y and z.d(·,·) is the distortion between
the original signals and reconstructed signals.
In our paper, we employ the distortion function d both in time
domains and frequency domains. Firstly, we utilize mean square er-
ror (MSE) between the original signals x and reconstructed signals
ˆx to evaluate the reconstructed error in time domain. Then we com-
pute MFCCs [14] for the source signal and reconstructed signal and
employ l2 distance between MFCC vectors in frequency domains to
pursue better human perceptual quality [15]. Considering the spec-
tral tilt phenomenon [16], if we use MSE as a loss function in fre-
quency domains, the relative error of high-frequencies will be more
signiﬁcant, leading to the loss of high frequency information. Hence,
we ﬁnally apply normalized mean squared error (NMSE) as the loss
function, which helps the model be optimized toward reconstructing
high frequencies and gives speech higher human perceptual quality.
2.4. Modular Implementation Details
In this part, we will share some details of DSST. We take speech sig-
nals as an example. After preprocessing operations, the input frame
x is modeled as a vector x∈ RB×C×L, where B is the number
of frames, C is the number of sound channels, and L is the frame
length.
(1) Semantic Analysis and Synthesis Transform ga,g s: The se-
mantic analysis and synthesis transform are used a similar structure
as the Kankanahalli network [17] , it contains multilayer 1D con-
volutional blocks and residual networks to extract the semantic fea-
tures of the waveform efﬁciently. The latent feature can be written as
y∈ RB×M× L
4 after twice downsampling,M is channel dimension.
(2) Prior Codec ha,h s: The structure of ha is consisted of 3
convolution blocks withN channels. The ﬁrst block contains a con-
volutional layers with kernel size 3 and a ReLU activation functions.
Other blocks are composed of a down-sampling layer consisting in
a strided convolution, with kernel size 5 and stride 2, followed by
a ReLU activation functions. hs mirrorsha. The hyperprior mod-
el summarizes the distribution of means and standard deviation in
z∈ RB×N× L
16 . It effectively captures the semantic temporal con-
nections of the speech waveform.
(3) Adaptive rate Deep JSCC Codec fe,f d: The architecture
of Deep JSCC codec is illustrated in Fig. 2. The encoder consists
ofNe Transformer blocks and FC layers to implement rate alloca-
tion. Speciﬁcally, y is ﬁrstly separated into patch embedding se-
quence{y1,y 2,...,y B}. To adaptively mapyi to a ¯kyi-dimensional
channel-input vector si, we develop a rate token vector set R =
{ry1,r y2...ryn} to represent rate information and quantization val-
ue setV =
{¯ky1, ¯ky2...¯kyn
}
to denote output dimension. By this
approach, each yi is merged with its corresponding rate token ryi
according to the entropy− logPyi|z(yi|z) and is fed into the Trans-
former block and FC layer to transform into a ¯kyi-dimensional vec-
tor. In particular, we employ a group of FC layers with different
output dimensions, it guided by the rate tokenryi accordingly.
Moreover, we perform SNR adaptation in this process. This pa-
per assumes that the transmitter and receiver can receive the SNR
feedback information for better performance. As illustrated in Fig.
2, each patchyi is concatenated with SNR tokenC∈ RB, such that
the Transformer can learn the SNR information. Hence, the single
model can perform at least as well as the models trained for each
SNR individually ﬁnally when trained under random SNRs.
(4) Optional Transmission Link : If we transmit z to obtain the
decoding gain, we will quantify z ﬁrst and perform entropy coding
and channel coding on it, which ensure an reliable transmission. At
the receiver, the prior decoder reconstructs side information µ, σ,
and feeds it into the Deep JSCC decoder.
3. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we provide illustrative numerical results to evaluate
the quality of speech waveform transmission. Objective quality met-
rics and a result of a subjective listening test are presented to validate
our designed approach.
3.1. Experimental Setups and Evaluation Metrics
The waveform is sampled at 16kHz from TIMIT dataset [18]. Dur-
ing total training process, we use Adam optimizer [19] with B =
100 frames in a single batch andL = 512 samples in a frame.
To evaluate our model, we use an objective evaluation metric
and conduct a subjective experiment as well. Concerning objective
quality evaluation, we report perceptual evaluation of speech quality
(PESQ) [20] scores to reﬂect the reconstructed speech quality. Fur-
thermore, we implement MUSHRA subjective test [21] to evaluate
audio quality by human raters. We randomly select ten reconstructed
waveform signals from the test dataset. To demonstrate the superi-
ority of our model, the comparison schemes include the traditional
transmission methods: AMR-WB + 5G LDPC and Opus + 5G LD-
PC, a standard neural JSCC model DeepSC-S. For traditional sepa-
ration methods, we choose different coding and modulation schemes
according to the adaptive modulation coding (AMC) principle [22].
3.2. PESQ Performance
Fig. 3(a) shows the rate-quality results among various transmis-
sion methods over the AWGN channel with channel SNR at 6dB.
The proposed DSST method outperforms traditional AMR-WB +
5G LDPC and Opus + 5G LDPC under all bandwidth consumption
situations. It is mainly because our scheme estimates the distribution
of speech source accurately, which mitigates the mismatch between
Authorized licensed use limited to: Beijing Jiaotong University. Downloaded on January 21,2026 at 06:23:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
